Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Avicenna.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my children, as you have completed this book, the last of medical science, by the completion of which its end is achieved, and through its explanations, expositions, and declarations, it seems to me that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the most important operations, namely, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, considered the most important operation in our region and time, is shrouded in great secrecy, as knowledge of it has declined; and there remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have led to much confusion and error regarding its principles and practice.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it appears to me that you have revitalized the order of this treatise through a second method of exposition and declaration and abridgment; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work may be added as an explanation, and to prepare for it, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which our skilled physician lacks mastery in this our time is because the art of medicine is complex, and he has not been trained in the science of anatomy, which reveals the youthfulness of the members, their forms, their conjunction and separation; the knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their names, and their extraction; the pulsation of the veins, the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, for in practice it is small, but most importantly in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already discussed this at the beginning of this book; for those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy, it is not to be wondered that they fall into errors that lead to the death of men, as you have seen many such individuals, some formed in this science and believing themselves experts through their experiences.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You see a foolish doctor who has incurred a serious infection in the thigh of a woman by cutting into her flesh and incising some of the thigh's arteries, allowing great pus to flow until the woman died from it.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who quickly took a stone from a man who had passed it in his state, and the stone was large, and he brought it out and extracted that stone with a part of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for haste to extract it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who was paid handsomely by a duke from our land for surgery, and he took on a black crusty wound that was severely infected in the patient's thigh; because of his ignorance, the doctor extracted the fracture, over the infection, using plasters and strips with strong stretching, and did not allow the infection to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then free the patient according to their wishes, apply relaxation, rest, and bandages for some days, and order that the incision be closed; and so too, as soon as the wound in the foot has healed, prevent further harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you will have called upon him, and he will free the bandage, and thus achieve peace and permanently alleviate their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, then it cannot be restrained, and the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until the patient perishes from the illness.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And see another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes ulcerated after some days, until the fire of his malice intensifies in him under his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the sharp pain is purely from melancholic humor; then it does not cover that it will reach him entirely with a ferrule, but rather that it should be in the member where it suffers most and is most vulnerable.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work that poses danger to the most vital dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are discussed that contain error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to take heed of these things and set them aside, so that people do not take advantage and shame you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means by the grace of God to attain salvation and glorious success, set aside the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and abandon your weapons of fear, so that your faith and name do not desert you; for more remains to your glory, both now in this world and later behind your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Crack open some of their secret parts:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad ailments with bad medicines, so that bad doctors are not blamed.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, starting with the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered on the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and anything that is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and the use of vents, plagues (possibly referring to pustules or sores), and the extraction of arrows and similar foreign bodies. It is entirely structured around the forms and uses of medical instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and realignment, and the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a structured chapter on foot inner structures and the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	With fire cautery and sharp medicine, and the recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the fire of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what conditions cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery fire and the documents of it is long and prolix, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a brief part of their discourses, for fear of prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every kind of pain universally, whether it be physical or spiritual, except for two conditions, which are pains caused by their own nature.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition where pain is caused by a lack of matter (or dryness), some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others claim the opposite, stating that cautery is not suitable for ailments caused by quality and dryness, as fire itself embodies quality and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat an ailment lacking moisture with heat and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who claim the opposite state that cautery is beneficial for any dry and painful condition in the human body, as when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the body dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And he says through the arguments of those who claim this, that he has personally experimented with it numerous times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable for this to be handled by someone who has no experience in the practice of cautery and who is unfamiliar with the diversity of physical conditions in people, their causes, the circumstances under which they occur, or the passage of time regarding them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other conditions, there is no cause for fear, especially in cases of pain and swelling, as all doctors are agreed on these, and they do not disagree about the use of cautery to treat them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery as a medicinal flame; for fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member being cauterized, without affecting other members with its heat, except to a slight degree.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicinal flame reaches those members from which it withdraws, and strongly causes pain in a member affected by a difficult-to-heal illness, aiding greatly in its healing.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm, and it is already known to us from experience and from the long study of the art on the truth of the causes; for this reason, I excuse you from the length of my speech. And if it were not that this secret fire, which I hide in this brief pause, cannot be read at my free will, the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion through which we eliminate illnesses, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my children, that the time of discord is when cauterization and bandaging should be performed, and it is best to do so in the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by accidental time may be overcome by the youthfulness of what is removed through cauterization, and most especially when cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, severe and acute, which do not suffer delay, since it is feared those that come with malice, that it is better to minimize damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so you must not fear in your hearts, o sons, for this condition is not esteemed by the common people or foolish doctors; it is that with such illness treated by cautery, it is not always completely cured, and they leave behind a consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not understood thus by those who care for it, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up moisture, which is the cause why pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, they may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the will to assert its validity and the virtue of its operation and the power of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the composition of the illness and the location of their malady, and the strength of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what is acquired by them through food and similar causes; but the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a few members with slight excesses and humidities, so with a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain may not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not to those who understand it, for they believe that there is no cure that profits from medicine or any other cause by cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not but when one administers the methods of healing in certain ailments, and those medicines confer no benefit, and then at the end of the cause, one applies cautery, and profits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from this it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this but for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only burns in certain bodies, and cauterizing with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; however, when you make a cautery with fire, it is not declared to you, because the gold is consumed according to the quantity you want due to the heat of the fire, and if you place it over the fire, some sheets will fall into the fire for the artisan to catch due to the occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterizing with iron must be done more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have organized those from the beginning within the feet, so now I am asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cauterization for head pain caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers warmth and heat to the affected area, which is a remedy for two causes: it is effective against sudden cold and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called coryza, from the head to the parts of the nose and ears, frequent sleep, toothache and throat pain, and generally all ailments that arise from coldness, as well as paralyses, soddenness and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: first, you must command the disease to be evacuated using a laxative medicine, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head, and place that sharp object between your legs on a heated bench, and place your hands on the affected foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your palm's pressure on the bridge of their nose between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the pain in the middle of the foot has been alleviated, mark that spot with a try, and then heat the olive cautery whose shape is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the unmarked spot with pressure, in a descending manner, so that your hand is constrained little by little, and you lift it up.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then gently lift your hand and examine the spot, and if you see that some bone is exposed along with any quantity of fat, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that position, or if it's chilled, as long as you can see the bone, do as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt, dissolve it over the spot, and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the burnt area at the border, leaving that one inside to destroy the wall of fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with the four-part medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens, the arm gets better and more youthful, so it is better and more restorative.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the specific nature of the bone is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adjusted to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say others that with the cautery you should reach the rear, while always strengthening the bone inward, until the bone hardens, and this is the form of creating small incisions:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors from the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and strengthened.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but only in certain cases out of fear; and that one, for me, is better for health when it is appropriate, because the head has been deprived of continuity through solution as we have witnessed in other members, and especially when the nature of the disease is feverish.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that comes first is more safe and better for me; and from this and through this work to health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and this is a result of illness, it is customary to use various remedies such as poultices, plasters, extracts, ointments, hot compresses, cold applications, and cataplasms, especially if a cautery has been previously applied that does not heal or benefit from any of those causes. Consider that if the nature of the malady is strong, and there is no significant external injury, then use another cautery instead of this one, a little bit.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that part of the patient's head where the hair is thin using an inner cautery, as long as the skin is intact.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skin and expose the amount of bone that has been affected, and cauterize it with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the area known as the 'socket', which is the place where the windpipe is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	Then hold your hand over it and do not expose the bone, because this illness causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, for this cautery which is used to burn the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; this is its form.
Capitol ters.	It appears that your message might have been cut off or there was a typo. "Capitol ters" does not form a complete or recognizable term in any language I'm familiar with, including those similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or check the spelling? I'd be happy to help translate or interpret if given more details.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding the treatment of non-ancient migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe headache occurs at the temple or there is pain within the skull, it is appropriate to use medications that clear the head, and also administer other treatments as mentioned regarding the deviations of illnesses; but if this does not prove effective, cauterization on the affected area should be performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	One may use cauterizing medicines or burning remedies such that you take a hot iron, and scorch it and cut off the ends of them from both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you cut the place of pain in the temple with a lance, until it is felt in the right place and left hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then you tighten it with a bandage for a descent constriction and leave it for three hours; and afterwards you remove the dressing, and leave the pain for two or three days, and place a cold compress on the affected area until the pain goes away.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that as a poultice until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with certain burning medicines which I have written about in the two tracts on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Prepare the cautery iron according to this manner: ignite the cautery whose shape is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a clave (or key) because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply pressure on the painful area, holding your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood stuck due to the nature of the wound is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the artery, raise your hand so that the artery is not affected, preventing the flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cover it with salt water and place a bandage over it, leaving it for three days. Apply plenty of ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife with a cautery according to cauteries, and be careful not to incise an artery in this fresh wound improperly.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of old wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an old wound as we have discussed in the previous treatment and you do not benefit from it, and the pain returns due to a malady that does not allow access to what we said about the first cautery with medicine or fire, then know that you must ignite the cuticular cautery until it is albified (whitened), indicating its effectiveness on the area of pain along the length of the line where the greatest intensity occurs. Rest your hand for a moment and strengthen it as you make an incision in the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which is damaged and affects chewing, and that the wound is not infected and the nerves affected by it are not damaged, and that there is no muscle spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from an arterial injury that is acute, as in the acute phase of it there is fear, especially for those who ignore what they are doing and lack study and patience; and let the operation on them begin at a later stage.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And come to the remembrance of the regulation of blood flow in cases of arterial accidents according to their method, in their place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not allow for these cautery treatments and the patient's condition is tolerable, perform a cautery on the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on the tightening of archery arrows, for this cautery with two blades is the better and more effective application.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text is structured as if it were organized into chapters or sections, with each line referencing a previous discussion or topic. Without additional context or surrounding text, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation of "Capitol v." However, given the context of medical treatise, it could refer to:
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with purgative remedies and other cures as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain persists, then apply heat with a cautery. This is known as a "puncta," and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the cautery close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire ear, or in a circular motion if the pain is in any particular part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Apply the cautery to the affected area of the ear little by little, until you have treated the entire place without causing further harm.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with pointed points is done on the entire ear and it becomes sore, then take care of the affected areas until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	**Capital VI.**
De cauterizacio de turtura.	**On the cauterization of tortuous (or twisted) parts.**
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tortuous part that is cured and treated with cauterization is due to the species (or conditions) that arise from phlegm, as we have discussed in the divisions of ailments.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoiding cauterization of the species that should be treated with drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When treating that species of tortuousness with jerks and contractions and gargling, and you do not confirm your cure, then know that you cauterize the ailment in three places: first, you burn the auricle, second, you make a small cut below their jaw, and third, you treat the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And hold the hot cautery against the opposite side of the injured part, for the softening effect is seen only in the area that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you apply a hot cautery to the base of the auricle, slightly above the ear canal, and on the temporal bone, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand as a cautery until the quantity of the substance of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is especially the shape of a knife, whose form is presented flatly.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you can see with your eyes, and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and its cure does not respond to the remedies we have mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all the corners of their head; and also cauterize the middle part of the head, as we have said; and cauterize the base of the skull.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more delayed; and then it is carefully cared for as you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of oblivion made by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient hot drinks and pills in the beginning, the servant will then clarify them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then remove the entire head of the patient and place it on the couch, applying the plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if for those remedies is good for him; otherwise, make him three cauterizations in the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, hold the thickness of the finger, and then carefully prepare the cautery for what follows.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have additional help and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle position; and if you need even more assistance, then cauterize both on either side of the spine.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Carefully prepare the inside so that it heals; and make the cauteries olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization and mollification of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand that you must proceed in the mollification of the head according to what we have said; then gently remove the patient's head covering, and cauterize it at the middle position on the head with an olive-shaped cautery, and cauterize all around the spine of the head, and cauterize over the last joint of the head, and make three cauteries over the cervical spinal bones.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much effort and the pain is tolerable but intense, then apply four cauteries on the spinal column of the back, later apply a cautery inside until the severe pain of the patient is alleviated, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then take care that it heals properly, and this cautery should be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus, it is necessary to purify the patient's brain at the beginning when they have had fever and other treatments as mentioned in the previous division, when the disease is severe and the patient can tolerate no more medication.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer warm and chewing foods to them, for several days, to improve their appetite.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery to that area with a hot iron at the middle of the head as per the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of the head, and over each of the shaved parts of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply cauteries as mentioned above, having a paralytic and relaxing effect on the body over the spinal columns of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	**On the Cauterization of Melancholy**
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt corrupted humors and excessive fluid, then cauterize those parts with the cauterizes that we have mentioned in their having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive fluid declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then he should drink something that purifies his mind according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, then make a decent cut from the side on the circle, and then rest it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel calm, and be held from every side.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply the liniment; it is now more worthy of being used before sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that above the fire by a measured temperature, which causes it to suffer when placed in water.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle and clean it until it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, following his good diet until he is healed; or, if you prefer, make small points with a cautery according to what is most convenient for him, holding your hand over it as ordered: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that cloth soaked in vinegar or grape juice around the edge.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Regarding the draining of water from the wound.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the onset of water in the wound is declared by the signs that I have mentioned in the previous section, then it begins and provides to the patient something that purifies his head, and pay attention to all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And do that soaking in a bath with certain herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command the patient to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a hot iron in the middle of the head; and cauterize two spots with two irons on both temples if the onset of water is in two wounds, or in one side if the onset is in one wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with hot irons all the veins and arteries that are left in the chains, and the cauterizations should be on that length at the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding from it, do not stop the process with any medicine, as much as you can.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And now, here is the translation of the sentence: "And you come to possess knowledge derived from animal bones and the removal of those, as well as the care of pus flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes, two bones are cauterized at the joints using two pointed cauterizers, thereby producing a certain effect.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and repeatedly present in the veins and arteries at the site of manifestation on the head outside, and it is observed that this causes excessive weakness of the connective tissues, then cauterize that place with a cautery as described in the beginning chapter about warming the eyes with hot water, and cauterize the middle part of the head, and two cauterizes at the joints between two bones in the temples, and two cauterizes at the joints between two bones below the eyes.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you require additional treatment, cauterize that part of the leg from the thigh to the top of the foot with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	**On the Cauterization of Nose Abscesses**
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating the condition we discussed in the previous section and your medication is not effective, prepare a mixture for the patient to drink for three nights; then shave their head and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize that area with a clamp, using two cauteries on both sides of the eyebrows, leaving just a small amount of hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cautery clamp.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV.**
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the use of cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply this cautery over the two eyebrows with a small amount of cautery at each end, and they will be elongated from the temporals.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn into parts within and press on the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn into parts within and press on the eye, cautery is performed in two manners: either by making incisions or by using a medicinal fire.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use fire for cautery, instruct the patient to comb their hairs in the opposite direction of how they normally grow, so that they are prolonged and intertwined; and if you must apply it again, tighten the eye of the eyelid with a bandage so that the hairs do not become matted.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are clean and washed, place the patient's head on the pillow, and then examine the socket of their eye with your hand, signaling according to the shape of a dead leaf, and indicating the beginning of the signal near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a cold compress or a moist cloth over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the heat with the instrument shaped like this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize along the marked figure, slowly and in several passes, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of healing of the eye is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs raised at the site of the eye's puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then apply a hot compress to the affected area until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that remedy until it is cured.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason, and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery on that part again as you had done originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed, so that the hairs do not remain odorous.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicines is what you command the patient to do with the hairs until they are prolonged and healed, and then a piece of cloth shaped like a fir leaf should be made from it.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known soap and a living flame, or what is suitable for this purpose, and mix those causes well, making it into a paste so that it does not freeze; and spread it from there onto the cloth formed like a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both wounds; and leave the fragrant edge soaked in white wax, and keep the patient's head in a cool place.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then stop talking about the medicine and apply a small amount, not too much, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as it continues to feel the medicine's bite, stop the treatment and apply it again according to its original location; then, when the biting ceases, clean the wound with water; and consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as if washed by fire or incision, for that is the desired state. And if it does not return to the application of the medicine at the site where it was first applied without disfigurations, then your operation will be in vain and the wound will contract.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and take care with a definite ointment or other until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to maintain careful vigilance that no part of the medicine falls away, and if after several days the eyelid becomes softened due to some cause from the hair in the socket, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and indeed just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way of making an eye-drop.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and therefore your treatment must be adjusted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not the method of treatment be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method we have described for the division of illnesses and your treatment does not work, be aware that when cauterizing it in this way: command the patient to rest their head on their side, and hold their head with some minister between their thighs in such a manner that it is neither damaged nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some warm compress or a paste of honey and grain meal to the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And shape the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, shaped like a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish to get out, do so with caution.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet he who is calm is better for the task at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from that area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over it a hot cautery, and with your hand protect the area from the heat of the cautery at the root of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's pain is not aggravated, and apply the cautery to the gray parts of the nose and burn that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply a compress with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it is not healed, then return to using the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and clean, as you have been taught in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of applying the cautery for a fistula: they first enter the place of the fistula and make it, then apply pressure to that small fissure from which it arises: and pour into it the amount of melted lead; hold your hand with good restraint so as not to harm the patient by reason that the melted lead does not reach the wound; cover what you have applied over the wound of the illness with white cloth or water, so that the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it in a wonderful manner.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer medicine from the nose and return the fistula to its place in the nose as it should be.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of the Hernia (Fistula)**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	You may encounter various accidents that cause fistulas in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those fistulas as we have said in the previous sections and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a heated knife to make a small incision according to this form that I will show:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and the cavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully remove that cold compress until the area is healed.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the case of uvula or palate fistulas, or those between the teeth, a breakdown occurs and an opening forms, and the proper treatment is not applied, you must ignite a cautery according to the extent of the fistula. Insert the burning instrument into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand, guide it until the hot tip reaches the depth of the wound; do this once or twice. Then apply the cold compress as previously described for healing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus, if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX:**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and these conditions do not improve with medication, then place the patient's chin on their thigh, and shape the cautery so that when you place the flame over the tooth, it enters slightly, allowing the patient to feel the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, which has been reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient gargle with salt water and hold it for an hour, after which stop it, because the decayed tooth is secured, the softened gums are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a sore or abscess, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterize it in two ways: either with cow dung cautery or with fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow dung is to take cow dung and smash it into powder, then wrap the mixture over the base of the tooth with a cloth, immerse it in hot water, and place that on the aching tooth until it becomes numb.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or linen in the wound on that side, place it over the aching tooth, and place the heated iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization is to address the wound of iron or flame, and it should not be too harsh on the patient's body, nor should the intensity of the fire reach the mouth of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as needed, place it over the tooth, and rest your hand on it until the cautery cools down; do this several times because the pain may return either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide and holds the cautery for about an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have seen fit according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of extrophules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophules are filled with flecma and bad humors that are resistant to digestion due to medicines, and you wish to drain them slightly, apply the cautery according to their shape, having two wide extremities so that the smoke of the cautery reaches the other end. You should place the burning cautery on one spot, then another if further drainage is needed, until it reaches the point of the extrophule.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the extrophule is small, apply the cautery according to its size, then leave it for three days and place a compress over it, close to the edge, until it has healed completely from what the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the catheter or the pointed cautery is used in such a way.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of veins and the constriction of arteries.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled by a gathering of fluid, then one must evacuate that ill-health at once with laxative medicines, and apply cautery to that place where the pleura is affected.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to harm the pleura with the cautery or to inflame the patient's chest too much.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that or another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of it is nailed in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that as described above until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old illness, then cauterize as follows: make two points with cautery on the furcula at places where the lungs tremble and rise; and another point in the middle part of the foot between two mammary glands; and both cauteries are nailed as described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization with pointed instruments should be the cautery called a point, whose shape precedes in the puncturing of the pain of ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And there should be points within these; and then carefully tend to that as it is mentioned before for its cure.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that extent: at one time, you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the throat, which is the chief duty of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humidity and it does not stick in its return time, you should reduce its dislocation until it returns to normal, and then place the patient on their back or side; and raise the knee that was initially affected, inside the fold of the thigh towards the left, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two tips; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply the cautery to the vein while it penetrates into another part; and the figure of the cauterization will appear when using a cautery with four tips.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so they are subtle according to the amount of effort; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this rule and for these cauterizations. VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place the entire cautery on the affected part, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the limb for any duration until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then cauterization is done on the muscle using a hot cautery or pointed cold cautery, as the joint is stabilized, the humidity is released, and the pain is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	About the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When stomach pain occurs with humidity within that extents from its structure and multiplies the space, and if you continue with treatment methods without considering, then know that the illness will rest on his back, spreading to his limbs and organs, and cauterize those areas with three cautery marks: one leaving a mark on the foot about the size of a finger, and two others on each side of the cautery, forming a triangular figure; extend between those not properly aligned, which will cause putrefaction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, also in the form shown; and this should be a circular cautery as well, according to the form depicted.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in such a way that this cautery does not frighten the patient: and you apply the cautery to the stomach according to the amount you wish to remove, and then cauterize those points; and then tend to the cure that was previously indicated until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of the varicose vein.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein ends due to cold, or moisture, or excessive wind, and it deviates from its normal course by overflowing, the disease is treated as we have said, not with compression, but by raising the affected part over the patient's head, and applying three cauterizations of this form and quantity to the vein below the hipbone, which promotes the decubitus position in men.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to their thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not be afraid of the pointed cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of moisture absorbed by the cloth is equal to half the specific type of the wound, and it is not too tight; and if the patient's illness is concentrated on their feet; or if not, they should sit down, who has already extended their limbs and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overly burn in the cauterization, and focus the sight of all the doctors so that the whole body is cauterized and enters the intestines, for here the cautery is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you wish to know if it is within the flesh or on the outer tunic of the leg, if it is within the flesh, the disease takes on great gravity and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is on the outer tunic of the leg, the pain is acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, turn the patient over so that their back is facing you; then identify the location of the hernia; and apply the pointed cautery that resembles a rag, whose shape was previously described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with those cauteries until all the wound is closed, so that it reaches the deep tissue, and yet does not cause further damage.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it should be known that this form of cautery should only be used with the one described in the study of medicine, and of all those mentioned, which have proven to cause harm; however, on some occasions, it can be daringly applied to this operation, but we must follow the rules laid down here, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They say that the ancient cauterization of pleurisy, according to this method, is done by taking a long, thin piece of steel from an old blade and making a point on one end, of appropriate thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse those in oil and heat them over the fire, and cauterize with a hot iron at the site between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone; place two small cauterizers below, slightly declining from the part where the beard is, and two cauterizers declining between the fifth rib and the breastbone, slightly declining towards the back parts; another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizers at the back parts; and one cautery at the site between the two shoulders, and two cauterizers on each side of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use iron cauteries in the form of a ray and ignite it to burn that area, placing it in the space between the ribs, so as to reach that condition and create a healthy opening, as we have said regarding the hernia of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	One should not fear using cautery in this perforation, as it often happens in the fistulous location where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	It appears that the text you provided does not contain any meaningful content or a clear continuation of the medical treatise. The section marked ".xxx." is typically used to indicate an omission or a placeholder, and it does not offer a complete sentence or idea for translation. If you have additional lines from this treatise, please provide them, and I will be happy to assist with the translation.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	# **On Cauterization**
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the malady of the foot with what we have mentioned about treatment in division and you do not apply your care, use cautery on it according to three methods, all of which are correct; one is that you make three or four incisions along the length of the foot according to the shape of the cauterization patterns on the leg.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or a bit less, and the manner of the cautery is the same manner we mentioned in the cauterization patterns on the leg completely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand with the cautery; the malady is in its worst state on both feet.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	There is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two points, which causes us to speak in the chapter about the dislocation of the muscle, and lifts the chain which is on the right side of the foot where the pain lies on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, by which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, be such that cauterizations are made according to the extent of the affected area.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then carefully insert two wooden splints, heated with fire, into the space where the spine penetrates from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterizations; and thus, four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three wooden splints.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then carefully remove the cauterizations after they have stopped bleeding, as it is more effective than other treatments in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to hydrops but directly to the affected area.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydrops, if the methods mentioned in the previous division do not help, you should apply four cauterizations around the affected area, and one cautery on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the groin, two cauterizations between the spinal bones, a cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be tailored to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And apply the cautery gently, so as not to cause prolonged pain.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the hernia from treatment until the cautery is applied over it so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be celebrated with aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be according to the shape of that one which is used for the chest, and it is that which is called an olive in accordance with its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization of the feet and other parts.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in cold water and become filled with water, cauterize the feet on the top of the foot between the big toe and the little finger, and do not touch that spot; then lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it, and lift your hand again, and do not return to that place until all the cold water has drained.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery in this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs and make a hot cautery at the end of each cutting tool.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one should leave it on the outside and the other at the middle of the thigh; and over each thigh, make two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: "xxxiii" indicates the chapter number, and there is no text following it in your prompt, so I cannot provide a translation without further context.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Regarding the cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to heat and humidity, it dissolves the valves, which are the digestive and retentive virtues located in the stomach and intestines, and this is treated by various methods of cure, sometimes suffering from malignant heats, exposing them through cauterization; then cauterize with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtle embrocation, with a fine nail cautery; or with cauteries over a large alcatin on alozis, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excessive humidity and the illness endure, then cauterize over the penis and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries near the stomach and around the groins, for this is a perfect cure for the young condition from which one does not stray.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or a thick humor or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by what we have said in the division, but the natural cure does not follow, cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left between the spinal bones, small and triangular, and with a cautery on the navel below two times.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; also apply a cautery to the vein, and another cautery to the patient's chest with a cautery claw, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then treat them until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding cauterization, remove the affected parts.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you make an incision, you use the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that flame into the incision and complete the procedure so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the ulcers are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have described, and then apply ointment to those areas until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so more gently.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi. (Note: "xxxvi" likely refers to the Roman numeral for 36)
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the patient's limbs.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not oppose the work that we have just described in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, then medicine should be applied with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when a fistula is present in nature, and it is old, it corrupts cleanliness and humidity, so the most worthy thing to do is to try to heal it gently, and then carefully consider the amount of pressure applied according to the depth of the fistula with the finger as just mentioned.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cautery on this fistula, according to the amount in which it intercepts the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat that cautery until these corrupted bodies are burned once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of nerve and vein combustion; if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the hernia, then pay attention to all those places; and do not intervene unless the fistula is in fleshy locations and you think it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and all foreign matters are removed from it, and they remain in that state for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the foreign matters are not from his body, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting his organs, and falls victim to those causes of which there will be remembrance in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii. (Note: The number xxxvii indicates the chapter number, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive wind, and the patient's condition worsens, you should cauterize them by applying a hot iron to each ulcer, especially focusing on those that require memory relief.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And for the first cauterization, we should make a small incision, so that three lines of cautery will result, and thus they will heal more quickly.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes debilitated and soft due to friction and humidity such that it does not retain urine, you should cauterize it at the pus-secreting point above the bladder, starting with the hairline of the penis, and cauterize with an iron on the right side, and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; cauterize with a single cautery at the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be made according to how it is needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter .XXXIX.**
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	**On the Cauterization of the Eye.**
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When inflammation and moisture occur in the eye, which prevents impregnation, corrupts the menstruation, delays conception, and causes pain during sexual intercourse, then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or with two cauteries, and they should be well-made.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of dislocated ankle bones.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucous membranes are infiltrated at the joint of the ankle, and they cause the displacement of its parts, and a sign of it is that the affected area is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is squeezed in it, causing pain.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle joint with a circular cautery, since you will have tried to loosen the joint circle around it, and thus the joint falls back into its proper place in the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above has its form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the veins; and be careful with that which is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the area of the ankle, caused by cold and moisture, the illness is treated with the method we have mentioned and should not be ignored, as it is an ancient practice to remove the illness from the body using thick humors or foul pills or artificial ones similar to them; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery on that area follows two ways: either with cauteries using burning medicines or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Turn according to two knowledgeable methods, of which one is to cauterize that over the opening of the anus with three triangular cautery instruments in this manner; and do it with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	In some cases, the cautery can be placed on the middle part over the anus' opening so that there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape is taken in the cauterization of the anus' dislocation, one that is circular and burns away all the moisture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in which pain is adhering to the anus and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended within the space, then cauterize that place with two cauteries over the thigh at the point where you direct the pain; and make a cautery on the shin four times, slightly on the outer side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cuttle, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain shifts to the point where it is intense in both feet, then cauterize that place with a cautery at three, four, or more points as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient experiences intense pain when lying on their back with the thigh affected, then cauterize that place with a cuttle cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations so that you do not harm nerves or cause great pain, and thereby aggravate the patient's condition or constrict them.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those which will be cauterized over the bone and finished in the cauterization, and a fire bed inflated until the swelling has reached the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then I apply a strong acid solution of the stomach, and thus I bring about death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization with hot iron, which is this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date palm or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, make another one-third its size; and leave the space between them equal to the night's duration; and these circles should be divided into two parts; and the length of those lines should be a knot or two knots, and fashion these edges of iron decoratively in the shape of circles; and this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Near the fire, it is heated until it turns red and gives off sparks, then placed over the affected area of the leg, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so it is cauterized with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then it is wrapped for three days; the wound is dressed with a border and left open for several days, and treatment continues until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Oh, sons, we have seldom used this kind of cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found those that regard it favorably.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	One should apply the best cautery to those who suffer from it, and find the appropriate place for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Maybe cauterization and medicines should be used to make two circles with a perforated armor on the frame of the door, whose length on the wall in the middle of their width is equal to two nuts or something like that.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces between certain parts are such that they correspond to the thickness of the said part, place cushions beneath and above them, and ensure they hold each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the affected area of the ankle of the patient, and take some cold water and pour it between two circles; the quality of that water should be gradually heated by fire, for a duration of an hour, and the patient should endure the burning and squeezing — as if by fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument, and remove all cold water from the affected area using warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then return it for three days and rest on that edge until the swelling of the adjustment subsides, leave it for some days, and it will heal; this is later in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is widespread in the thigh or leg, apply a compress containing water as it is done with hot water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a mixture of alkali and cause from both parts, grind them, and place in a new vessel, into which the opening of the former part is perforated with a small hole according to the amount that fits inside.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of one wave against another or in a different position, and then sit on that alkaline and living base of hot water, which takes away pain with a single touch, and after you have tightly compressed them with your hand in a good way, release the pressure so that the hot water from the wave descends into the part where the cold wave was.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, sit it on another living cause and another renewable alkaline, so that now it becomes a very powerful strength, which is administered in most medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are some medicines that are cauterized with broad applications, both quickly and skillfully, mixing them with more delicate causes in such a way that they become more effective.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	He here relates the story of a man from ancient times who performed an operation and cure for pain in the water and sciatic vein, and magnified as very beneficial from that, and says it is not necessary for any other treatment, and because he healed it completely by re-treating, for he immersed him strongly in the bath and immediately freed him of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that one should take a fresh fig or, if not available, some other fruit; twist it slightly and place it on the water where the pain is located, in the joint, or in the leg, and leave it there.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for three hours or as long as the pain subsides from the joint's movement.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse that part in water and, when the body is relaxed, insert it into the sun, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines, but rather focus on the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the vein in the goat's foot is cauterized with a narrow flame, it becomes moist; and the cautery should be applied to it in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat's hair and apply it to the affected area over the fire until it forms a carbuncle; then place it on the wool and open it when it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and do not stop until the spark of the bite disappears from the water and the pain is relieved.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is felt in the back for various reasons, such as stiffness or bruising or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the infusion of irritant and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterize only in this single species which is made by effusion of bad matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, we should evacuate the hernia with pills that resemble it, which are to be placed over the two parts where the pain is located, at three lines according to its extent, and then perform cauterization on each line as much or little as necessary, depending on the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using the median cautery knife according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii. (This appears to be a chapter heading, continuing the structure of the medical treatise.)
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This illness often appears in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it affects their narrow structure, evening out their limbs and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	It is found in the last spinal segment of the back and in the nerves that begin to rise above the other spinal segments.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you observe this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize with a pointed cautery that is shaped in this way:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery across the entire span of the spine's union.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And they should be punctures appropriate among them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then take care of the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Beware that cautery should not be administered to inflammation caused by the spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus gout caused by cold is treated with a heating method rather than avoiding pain, and when the pain persists, the use of cautery is appropriate.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And this is how you cauterize that immediate evacuation in the region of the foot joint with hot cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And here is the description of the olive cautery, which is shaped as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints, and this persists, then cauterize that over any toe with three or four hot cauteries using this olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use these cauteries frequently, then cauterize carefully without pressing too hard with the cautery, just enough to target the specific area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains occur both in the inside and outside of the joint, then apply the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the joints, and it is called the ague, then make points along the course of the filaments as they twist, making points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remain pains in these parts, make points along the course of the filaments on each knuckle and on the joint of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains occur in various joints or muscles, then cauterize them from all sides of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the disease from good regimen and the reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is removed through this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the angles and it opens the intestines in front of the hernia towards the genitals, treatment should begin by ensuring that the patient maintains proper diet during their recovery, and uses gentle means to prevent the wound from reopening.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue supporting the patient between your hands on their back, and instruct them to keep their breath relaxed when the hernia or intestines protrude or reappear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the intestine to its place and carefully try to close the rupture over the pelvic bone, marking the end of the injury as similar to a circle at the upper openings of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery whose shape is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which is a moist and wrinkled skin.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then apply the cautery over that mark with your hand over the cautery, and press firmly as you successfully pass through the flesh of the tendon into the middle of the bone; and repeat another time if it does not succeed on the first attempt to go through the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the position of the hernia during cauterization to avoid disturbing it, so that it does not lead to the patient's death or other grave illness.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bones, as it does not aid your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be mindful that the cautery on children should be delicate according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the site of the cauterization for three days, applying fresh bandages until the burn heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for 10 days until the wound and infection are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to prevent the flow of nutrition to it according to the duration of the patient's recovery, which straightens their belly, and that the hernia does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, after approximately ten days, when it is desired to remove it, the treatment should be administered properly and it should be held for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should be reduced in work and the intake of food and wine, and from loud voices, for when this regimen of healing is followed diligently, complete recovery will follow.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will now describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, at the very beginning, and since they do not heal, cauterize the rupture with a red hot cautery according to the amount of matter that is extruded from the hernia, just as with the third part of the belly; and then care should be taken for that which we have said, and it should not be pressed too tightly.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And they already said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is indicated and tried.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And they stop the line that goes for the latitude in the flesh above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capital. XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain ends in other members due to cold or impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment with medicines, then you should cauterize with pointed cauteries.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauteries should be for each member according to its size and extent, its nature and development, its position and the location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually with those pains, points are made from one member to another close to that member, so make sure you get these pointed cauteries until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes need cauterization for a very great wound, and rarely if the type of leprosy is due to putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is acute and if it responds to treatment as we have said in the classification, and not to any of those mentioned above, and be wary of the patient's condition that corruption comprehends all parts of his body and all its complications; then cauterize him on the head with a cautery: at the middle part of the head, and at the second below it, trim the hair at the forehead; and both on two horns; and at one behind, on the nape or serve it.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, with the cautery, apply a little pressure to the bone, which causes a slight indentation, and dislocates the ligaments, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is facilitated; and cauterize on the cushion as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the body and is clearly manifested, you should cauterize those areas with these cauteries that we have mentioned above; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on both spine joints of the neck, and six cauteries on the back's spine, and a large one on the spine near the tail, and one on the thigh, and two on each thigh, and two on both legs, and one on each leg, and two on both arms, and two on each muscle, and cauterize the tendons of their feet; cauterize all joints of the hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on the sole of their feet, and on the heel of each foot, and on the sides of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the foot, do not hurt them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the thigh, and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the bowel.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more precise the cauterization, the greater the benefit and the greater its effectiveness; and you know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, as they do when their limbs are restrained, since their body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take note that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the tools' species.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then properly tend the cauterized wounds with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies until they are healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is frozen or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it remains unhealthy, then you cauterize that frozen member with a cautery according to the severity of the member or the lightness of it.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the hot cautery should enter into the depth of the flesh slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care that the cautery is applied where it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some times a stupor is cauterized which extends to the greater and smaller members, and to the spinal columns of the back, and touches the nerves of that member, and the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not attempt to treat this unless he who is skilled in the anatomy of the body's members and the emergence of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	**Capitol .xlix.**
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of moles that are deformed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When moles are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal treatments, then you cauterize them with a pointed cautery for a short time according to the quantity of the specific type of cord within, until the white and color of it are reduced, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a mixture of flour made from err and lentils, with olive oil and arnagrosa leaves, or pigeon's blood or hare's urine, each ingredient in separate portions but all mixed together, and apply it as a poultice over the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	I am unable to provide a translation for this as it is just a single letter 'L' followed by a period, which does not form a coherent phrase or sentence in any language I recognize. If you can provide a complete sentence or passage from the text, I would be happy to assist with its translation.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of cracks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and you want to remove that part, cauterize it with a circular cautery along its circumference as it is revolved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the knowledgeable ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more right to cauterize it in its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	**Chapter.**
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	**On the Cauterization of Ulcers**
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an ulcer is delayed in healing, it may be due to excess moisture, or the state of illness, as it is old and weak, with little blood flow, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the ulcer. Then cauterize its circumference with several small pointed cauteries; and press gently on it so that it will heal faster.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows: and place it in the middle of the burned area until the wire penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to that area which is deepest, so that the body of the arm is separated, then be careful that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading corruption in the member which corrodes it as if fire were eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a location which is to be treated with fire, then heat cautery claws, both small and large, as appropriate for the area where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply the cautery from all sides until you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then bandage it for three days, placing a poultice of mixed oil over the cauterized areas until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption disappears.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with a poultice of fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	It may be three days before the meat is completely healed and free from corruption, which is good; if not, apply the cautery again to what is broken in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corruption is treated occasionally with sharp medicine, as that is preferable to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is sometimes preferable for the young, as it lessens the chance of infection.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already spoken of his cure with sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will need from him.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Procedures
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	You should pay close attention to the parts of a foot affected by malady, which is often called a "clau" (toenail) and causes a severe, deep-seated pain; and cauterization on these areas follows two methods, either with hot iron or with caustic water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The hot iron cauterization involves lighting the cautery knife with fire, similar to a lightning strike, made of metal according to the amount required for the entire toenail, and it should be done with subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply that heat to the toe, and turn your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the toe.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a paste made from wild malvas (a type of herb) mixed with salt to that area, and leave the paste on it for one night, so that it is eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a ointment made from generated meat (a possible reference to a medicated salve) until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not curable, and recurring accidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you should use these cauterizes with water, and take a small pipe of iron or bronze or a pen-shaped tool, and apply that to the toe; then pour a few drops of water into the pipe, hold your hand over it, and turn it around with compression from your hand entirely, pushing the edge of the pipe into the root of the joint, and you will see the water drain out at the base of the joint. Wait for the patient to feel the burning of the water for about an hour, then remove it, because the joint will be freed from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they also make those incisions in them so that everything of theirs which is inside the body comes out.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then take care of those pus that the roots of the claws are eradicated with these ointments which nourish the flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from a painful cause, or for any other similar reason, remember that you must cauterize it with four cautery instruments or with a hot iron on each spine in the back, between each spine there should be one cautery; and also cauterize his foot, and over his stomach with olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him is calmed and hastens the healing of the ill health that afflicts.
Capitol .lv.	It appears that you have provided a chapter number (Capitol .lv.) but no text to translate or analyze. To assist you effectively, I need the specific content of the section marked with this chapter number. Please provide the relevant text for translation or further analysis.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	**On the Cauterization of White Accidents (Sores) on the Body.**
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white spots are expelled, and pustules open up which are made of coarse corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning, when you appear, cauterize over all parts of the fistula with a subtle cautery or a heated iron, the tip of which is extended to fire; or cut with a long-handled knife; or cauterize with a lens.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; they are not rigid, and excess matter is removed from them, making those healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it may be necessary to cover that this is done with a proper evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flu (or phlegm) from a sanatory accident through archery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Various observed signs should flow from the arrow that pierces through the wound, which should be removed, or from the beginning of abscesses or cautery on a limb, and then they appear similar, and it is difficult to retain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you must apply your hand over the orifice of the arrow, and press upon it, gradually opening the passages until the flow of blood ceases, so that it does not gush out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply hot olive oil cauteries, both small and large, in many places, and blow upon them until they become inflamed.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large (one) according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, over which you have previously drained the pus, and cauterize it until it is incised and restricted that flow of blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you remove the instrument and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared over the fire, and do not cease to repeat this until the clot is reduced.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to irritate the nerves here, which can cause further harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the clot, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction, for when its ends are removed, the extremities are most easily burned and the clot is restricted, or by tying it with thread or ligature in a strong manner, or pausing over it medications of which the virtue is to constrict the clot; and they should be strengthened on a cushion or bed of costivation.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a reasonable restriction of movement to the patient with bandages or by means of positions due to burning and similar causes, does not bring relief but only torment.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this should happen to anyone and neither a doctor nor medicine is at hand, then open the mentioned site on the affected vein as we have said, and understand that the constriction within must be released so that the plague does not spread further, and over the hard swelling, it should be washed with cold water until the vein becomes hardened and thickened; and afterward, consider what cautery or medicine is required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, blisters, phlebotomy, sores, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all illnesses in which fire cauterization is appropriate and medicinal burning useful, along with their occasions and causes, and the tools necessary for these, according to the forms of cauterization; I have arranged the chapters on the treatment of conditions from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, you will proceed in this manner so that relief is provided to him who seeks it, whenever he has requested it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, understand, sons, that in this chapter, the purpose is to alleviate fear, as it was in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And since it is of great importance that you understand this, be aware that in the operation discussed in this chapter, due to the flow of blood during treatment, which could be fatal, one must apply pressure or make an incision on the affected area or open the abscess or clean the wound or extract an arrowhead or begin a bleed, and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many of them death ensues.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it should not fall upon you in which there is weakness, for sometimes you must take care of yourself like the ways of sick people.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, some will go to their illness and they must be lightened from it, and you should avoid death from it, and this is due to the urgency of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and the illness that means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of these, he who gives you hope and says, "I expect health from you," his illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	So therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you of this manner; let your caution be greater than belief and your greed; and do not presume any cause about it except for certain knowledge which proves it to you, and to which a commendable succession has occurred.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your illnesses the prognosis and indication of the cure to which health is restored, for it aids you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not allow you to have misguided or unprotected thoughts, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this distinct chapter according to the preceding one in the chapter on cautery, concerning the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you regarding whatever you need from it.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Regarding the treatment of water contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness often attacks children during teething, and when the dark blood enters the child's head, its vitality is affected.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times it appears for an unseen cause that is not clear.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This malady may also be seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have witnessed great damage done to them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that the head of a child, whose body was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified so that he could not lower himself onto his bed because of the size of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased within until fire death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skin and bones or is added beneath the bones on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that one, if the humidity is between the skin and bones and there is little abscess, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the direction, and the length of the fissure should be two fingers deep so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the form of the spatulum.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is further increased and the abscess becomes larger, there are here two fissures according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture remains between the bones, it is a sign that you must open the eye sockets completely and the water is squeezed out when you press on that part with your hand inside and it does not go back to its original state.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make sure that you cut in the middle part of the head along three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract the incision completely to remove all moisture; tighten the fissures with bandages and plasters; drill into it from above using wine and oil within five days, and clean the wound and treat the infection with ointment and poultice, and hold the head in an even position; feed the patient dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another incision technique which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left; so pay close attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and do it as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and morbid matter through the evacuation of humidity from the wound.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries close to the auricles, known as 'hilasseysse'.
Capitol segon.	**Chapter II:**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When dealing with sudden or severe pain in the ears or feet, and this condition is ancient and does not yield to medical treatments, the final remedy lies in the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those that the disease has made its head, then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tighten the collar of the patient with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places which are appropriately cooled down, and they remain hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then tie over the artery with a strap, and incise each one with the sharp edge of the knife as you proceed with the incision, reaching inside the bone according to the extent of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the knife between the artery and cut it where the incisions are made on them.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be such that if any vein is incised, the blood flow becomes blocked at the exit, which would then spontaneously discharge outward frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what one should extract from the wound is a quantity of blood equal to a sixth, and one should not extract more or less than that; and all this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the arrow in the patient's body.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague; and if there remains on the bone any cause of infection, cut it off so that it does not spread gangrene cautiously.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully tend to it until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migranes occur, caused by the humidity of the air and the quality of the tears in the temples, or an old and violent pain similar to these, and it does not improve with medical treatments as mentioned above, then we have recourse to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is to remove the disease that affects the temples; understand the artery appearing in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its violence.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the collar of the disease with some cloth; then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears to you clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the rope as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and you open it up and extract the arrow from its hidden position within, pulling it out from the rope and uncovering that of the tunic which is left behind, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you wrap it with your finger at its end and cut it in a single piece according to the amount by which its ends are stretched and contracted, and if they are not cut, blood will not flow entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty the vein of blood, three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arrow is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with strings, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and enable blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this at that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it while the incision is still fresh, and apply it to that particular spot.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of a hot and wet condition; for cauterization is useful for conditions that end in humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the ribs that you have removed from their original position, and place them properly over it, nicely powdered, and apply treatment with dry medicines to make the flesh and bones heal within a short time.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time, bleeding from the rib occurs, then you must restrict that blood flow, either with cauterization or by filling the space with something, and tightly hold your hand over it until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present, hold your tongue over the area until the inflammation subsides, and apply water with a strong coldness to the spot, and tighten it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more lightly extracted from archery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, after you have sensed both spots by trying, and apply some fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, as it is not solidified by this cautery alone.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both blades is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better with just one blade, as if both are very sharp and close to each other, they do not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, heat from the fire is retained in it and the flesh is slightly separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and is most delicate.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two jaws should be such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said object.
Capitol quart.	Final quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of sudden and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and it is the veins on the forehead just beneath the eyes that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition is perceived, and the patient's face appears flushed and they experience a feeling of buzzing in their head as if ants were marching, and their eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point where their eyelashes become sticky, and their eyelids irritated by the sharpness of the tears, the old remedies used for treating such conditions in this operation are ineffective.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on their forehead, and then incise three slits in the forehead equally spaced according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two parts: one fissure is equally spaced to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids which are on the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be mindful of the beginning of the jawbones which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three parts, adjust accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife between the two sharp extremities, which is the form of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the rib cage, and then make this cut from the first incision into the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strike with this knife in the first incision, and insert another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the rib, and the blunt edge along the bone, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and sever all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appear of the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the areas of frozen veins' pressure points.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each fissure a warm compress of fine wool, and apply over those powders covered with vinegar and wine, and ensure it does not cause infection cautiously.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, loosen the lint and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then treat it with basilic oil or rose oil and other herbs until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	It appears that there might be a missing or incomplete sentence here. The text seems to be referring back to an earlier topic, possibly about treating medical conditions. Without context, it's challenging to provide a precise translation for "Capitol .v." If this is a reference to a specific chapter or section, more context would be needed to accurately translate that part as well.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of headaches through catharsis and the descent of fluids from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute catarrh and its persistent nature cause the patient's feet to become exhausted and weak, and careful observation reveals that their eyelids are ulcerated along with their eyelashes, and in the region of the head there is intense pain and resulting discharge, then know through these accidents that the matter and catarrh do not come from outside but originate from veins within the parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to rinse their face, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin at the incision of the left temporal bone towards the right temporal bone; and make the cut within the bone; and with your hand remove the blood from the temples which are worse after mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all blood or moisture with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill the space between the two lips of the wound with cotton or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply fresh, clean powders mixed with vinegar and oil to prevent infection and avoid cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the infection has decreased, then apply pressure to the bone that begins at the deepest part of the flesh, and treat that with a drying remedy as if you were making a paste from wheat flour and cologne, in equal parts, and applying it to these wounds to heal the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what cats have in their ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that create catarrh in the ears are one of four types: either a mineral or something similar to mineral, such as iron and rust, or from plants, such as chickpeas or fava beans, or fluid-like, such as water and wine mixed, or similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a mineral or any similar cause of those causes that do not affect or inflame the ear creates catarrh in the ear, and the ear is exposed to the sun, and if the mineral is chewed, it distills into that particular cause of oil or garlic, then administer the extraction of it, and use conditions to help the nose during the sneezing event.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some soft cloth or wool around the ear canal, and extend the ear away from the affected area, as warmth is known to be effective against these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not effective, then administer the extraction of it using an instrument called a gentle epichorionic forceps, of which this is the shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if a wound is forgotten, it is good; otherwise, administer the extraction of the hernia with great subtlety and little effort.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten, make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract it from the small intestine with great force, as we have mentioned above.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this method is not forgotten, take some hot coals or a heated apparatus with which the tools are held, and apply them to the end of the rod, then wrap it decently around the limb.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it into the ear canal easily and dry the ear from any moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so, if you have not forgotten all the causes we have mentioned, then cut off that which causes an abscess or cramp.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting off that part is to begin by cauterizing the diseased vein and extracting the blood according to the nature of its virtue, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the flap back towards its original position, making a small cut in the base of the flap where it was previously attached.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the cut is in the shape of a crescent moon, reach for the stone (presumably a kidney stone) and, once found, hold it there as quickly as possible to stop the flow of urine; then treat that cut so that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the pain in the auricle is an inflammation due to swelling, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not observe these instructions, take some fine, sharp instrument...
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the removal of that great thing which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you consider that the thing has already been moistened by the ear's vapor and is stuck in hard masses, or enclosed in a narrow space, or cut as we have said, for it is easier to remove it in that case.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	If water has entered the ear, use sneezing to remove it at the beginning, and fill the ear with any soft cloth or woolen thread, then gently pull on that cloth in the ear where the water is, and if it comes out, it is good; otherwise, take a few hot stones from the fire, soften them slightly, and the patient should insert one of those into the opening of their ear and jump up on one foot, pounding the stone against another.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease applying pressure until all water has been evacuated.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been evacuated in this way, using either paper or cloth, place one end of it on the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until all of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then place another cloth and do this multiple times until all water is evacuated, and then tear that one with a tube as they say the water drawing stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body from the ear, if it is small and similar to a worm, treat it as we have said in the previous division; but if it is a large object that causes an apparent inflammation, then administer the extraction with gentle movements and scissors, and the cause of it should be treated lightly compared to all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	During the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you cure that which we have mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distills, and do not apply your care, then you must hold the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that worm or use delicate gestures, but if no cause appears, take a tube narrow at one end and wide at the other, the shape of which is as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtile extremity into the ear according to the quantity of suffering caused by the malady; and then suck with a strong suction, making movements, until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey these instructions, then place and close the plug in the tube's passage with wax as we have said; administer distills which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the division of distills.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your flow be the one that pours medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make one of silver or brass, narrow it down so that there is a small opening on top and smooth its surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus, it is inserted into the concave part of the containment tube here, which is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it at the decent end of the tube, then pour oil into the concave part of the hearing, or juice from some herb, or any medicine you prefer for this treatment — into the ear — and then insert the ray gently on top, compressing with your hand to expel the oil into the concave part of the ear and relieve the patient's pain.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should be already scalded with fire on one small part.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you extract from the ear is not too damaged, because the medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear infections.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children have infections in their parents' stomachs that are not perforating, and this also happens in some men, an infection in the meat of the ear due to a plague or some flesh damage in that area; and this infection sometimes occurs at the base of the ear piercing that is not noticed, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the abdomen of the patient, which does not comprehend the cause, is in the most critical conditions for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you succeed in understanding the cause, be sure to observe the patient's pain and look at it closely.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you then observe an outward swelling, open that with a delicate spatula, the form of which is like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the swelling has both acute and blunt edges, and the spatula is two-edged so as not to hurt the patient's skin.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to a lump in the skin or flesh, then use sharp, fine scissors and cut it gently until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an infection in the earlobe, take a thin wire and heat it with fire slightly, then insert that into the flesh of the earlobe.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have sensed an infection in this that the patient finds as easy to expel, due to its urgency, try to relieve the pressure of it as easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the earlobe.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cover the earlobe with a cloth according to the amount of space the infection has occupied, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the plague; or take some and immerse it in water, then sprinkle on it every third day and use it; if the earlobe is already scabs, be careful not to ruin the ointment and replace it with other ointment made from oil that is smooth, as long as the infection cautiously yields; and attend to it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a flux of blood occurs, immerse a clean cloth or linen in warm water, place it on the wound, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is called distillation in the treatment text.
Capitol .viii.	It appears that you have provided a reference to "Capitol .viii." without any additional context or text to translate. To assist you effectively, I would need the actual content of what is referred to as "Capitol .viii." Please provide the relevant text so that I can offer accurate translation and analysis.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the treatment of atrophy affecting the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atrophy of the eyelids, sometimes caused by moisture, other times by dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those herbs or onions, and chop the roots into pieces, then place them over the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If intense pain flows from a venous wound, then you cauterize them with a delicate anti-fever cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and carefully watch them return when there is no further cause for their cuts; and when they are cauterized with fire, those cuts are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Visible growths on the eyelids, any cause that assembles itself into great strength and hardness is called a tumor because of its magnitude.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And the addition of excessive moisture on both the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider when the swelling is proceeding in it from the eyelid and is aggravated throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So now focus on that open gap according to its extent, and carefully extract it from all sides until it is completely evacuated, and then suspend it and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you cannot begin the incision on it unless you first penetrate the eyelid with a slight cut, then this will be noted as due to no specific cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, then adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then no great harm will come from that place as the body's own healing powers restore and nourish it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing within the folds of the eyelid, then you should explore the surface within, lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as you initially deem necessary, press on it from all sides, and if the eyelid itself is enlarged due to some cause, do not cut it for no reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the initial cut, rinse the wound with salt water; and treat the area with living water until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The treatment is for the inflammation which is generated in the layers of the eyelid above, and it appears most frequently in children, aggravating the wounds of those affected and leading to their rupture; and because of this, they cannot bear the light of the sun, as tears gather at these sites.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you keep those actions on their faces for a long time, and on their sleeping faces; and the eyebrows of theirs leave the eyelids moist, which has already covered inflammation and the imminent approach of attack is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the attack within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And certain techniques of operation are used when the patient's head is in a tilted position on the side, then cloth is placed and cold applied, forming a circle according to the amount of fluid present from all parts, and this is pressed against that area, pressing with your fingers over all so that accretion occurs in the middle of the circle, and then stop at the middle of that area with moisture incident upon the fissure by its width, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flabotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place the probe in such a way that you open the entire cord until you reach accretion, for in the most advanced processes, accretion occurs through fissures according to the form of white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those cloth bands that you have wrapped around the affected parts outside and unwind them with your left and right hand until they are completely removed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust it in the fissure, so that the spatula does not reach the wrong place and injure that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust the spatula with a little ease until it reaches the point; and then remove the one that we have mentioned; and afterwards immerse cloths in water, add vinegar and place them over the area, and sprinkle those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to prevent what is removed from becoming moist.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs at the surgical site, then treat it with suitable bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	**Chapter XI**
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	**On the Ways of Touching (or Examining) the Patient**
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes there are growths from natural causes and they become antique, then those our nails when touching the eye cause pains in various ways, with constant tears and watering of the eyelids, until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eye that is called "tactinir del huel" (touching/disturbing the eye), and its cure is in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization; or by incising and suturing; or with cannas (irrigation tubes), as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you should place the edge of the patient's eyelid in your left hand; then convert (or flip) the eyelid with your right hand, and if it does not convert easily, insert an needle into the part where the growth is embedded in the eyelid and cause the needle to pierce through it towards the roots of the hairs, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs do not exist. Then pull the thread (or needle) slowly away from its attachment on the lid and turn that part against the direction of the hairs.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then carefully cut open the space between the eyelid margins, adjusting the hairs with a sharp instrument; then extract the tear duct and place it back against the eyelid using small cotton or fabric, and press gently on the eyelid as if it were a plum.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary to consider that the shape varies according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, as it differs in men; those who require a significant incision into the eyelid are those with greater swelling.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then carefully cut with the scalpel along both lines that you have indicated, beginning from the lacrimal duct major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as the king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then apply the onion to one of the angles of the wound, scrape it entirely, and adjust the dressing with two lips of cloth or fine wool, clean the discharge, and let what is superfluous of the pus adhere to both eyebrows due to some hidden causes, if you wish to do so, otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then, after three or four days, unbind the suture of the wound and cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the scar from the suture open, and treat it with what dries and tightens, for the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; but tighter sutures are better. Thus, I have told you the ancient practices of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But above all, be solicitous about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is nothing to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat it, which is as follows: one should place figures on the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then raise the eyelid with three sharp points, segregating and congregating according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If the points are not available, take a needle with a thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, then insert the other two threads close to the lacrimal glands, both large and small, and adjust these threads equalize them, then raise your hand with the same elevation as before, raising the entire eyelid over which the figures are placed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs after your incision or opening, cover it with wax and treat it like any other abscess.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, it is necessary to close the eyelid as its hairs are turning, so use what we have mentioned about incision; a stitch is more artificial in some places.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cut with scissors is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure inside as I have mentioned; then make two or three thin scissors or blades whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width corresponds to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the ends of each piece, where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the patient, and tighten the scissors of each cut piece with strong pressure, leaving it for a few days, for the thread by its tightness will die and be rejected, and it will fall off once it has done its job.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and return to treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two tubes according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the correct amount of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of painful hairs on the body with an agule when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and painful to the touch, the operation on them involves taking a very fine needle and pricking at those delicate scales, then carefully adjusting the extremities and handling them in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the thread should be about the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then take another thin thread, pass it quickly through, and twist the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head in a small position near the sun so that your work is clearly seen, as this is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the closely woven hair, using skill, and pierce it deeply within until you extract that from its natural place.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out from its root, insert that into the oil, and take one or two or three hairs at a time.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then with your hand, pull out the hair that has been removed from its root and mixed with the oil on the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is torn and the skin is not broken, you will dress it in the same way as you have prepared it for the wound above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when you have the sight of pus, then you will dress and prepare it, and drain some and press on any lumps or hardness in the wound, and leave the dressing for two or three days, until the skin sticks to its place and a good scar forms over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is very thin, you will use a longer natural hair and raise it up to that, or leave it until it grows long enough to create some space, and then you will lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see the eye begin to water, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cauterization, it is called conjunctivitis, and this inflammation can be either natural or accidental, caused by the healing of wounds or sections or cauterizations, or similar to their original malady.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation is that you break up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it what is between those a piece of cloth from him, and tie them together so that they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must use healing remedies for the causes that dry out, constrict; for if you do this, it will lead to even worse inflammation than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those of causes that mollify as well as fenugreek, and steep in water in which the roots are high and the seeds of it, or in dye from licorice, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and treat that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you perforate with all means that are not solidified according to the form that you see at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of deviation that does not return the form of the place according to what you see beforehand.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of hernia in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia that is done in the lower eyelid, which is actually not called hernia; it is of some nature or other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental hernia may be caused by disease, an incision, cauterization, or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it through the tear from left to right, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh apart from its attachments with the needle and cut with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, return the eyelid to its proper position if it is not; otherwise, take the thread and hold that in the split area, and turn the eyelid over, and make two slits in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two slits should form two angles of the incision you have made, so that they meet at a point, and this point forms the figure of their union.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letters: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stop the flesh there according to the amount that the wound requires, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with woolen thread, and apply treatments as mentioned regarding the soothing medicines and blisters until it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if further elevation is needed through fracture, suture, or cautery, then cover that you make a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid as previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the blister between two lips as previously mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entirety of the discourse on treatment for elevation when it is above or below, let it flow in operation according to its preparation in the form of elevation, and that form varies in many ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares a plan in some way that is possible for him to restore the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats that illness according to what suits him from the operation and the tools at his best disposal.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in most people, the eyelid seems to be solidified with the whites of the eye, and it is hindered from its natural movement, so you must insert your finger between the eyelid and the white, and lift up the eyelid, or extend it away from the corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you should incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, which is not sharp enough to cause additional injury, making it slightly obtuse so that the illness is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the whites of the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should remove that adhesion easily, so long as the eyelid can return to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply to it warm salt water with which you wash; or distil sun-heated oil dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with warm water, place a woolen cloth soaked in almond oil on the eye, and use the third day for consolidative treatments until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI.**
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eye and the prominence of the flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eye has two manners of being, either it is nervous, like a delicate glass; or non-nervous, resembling white moisture frozen, which when pierced, is easily separated and the point does not stick in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until the larger tear duct is reached, gradually covering the sight and blocking light and motion.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The proper way to perform the incision is to have the patient hold their head in the small of their back, open their eyes wide, raise their upper eyelid with one hand, and then carefully pry open the corner of the eye with the other, gently stretching the skin away from the bone.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and, using a horsehair or a similar material, carefully thread the needle with great precision, placing it in the middle of the eyelid. Penetrate the needle through the eyelash and tie it to the faithful thread; extend the thread upwards and cut the eyelash at its base, removing the part that blocks the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so too, you cut the hair within the corner of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then carefully incise the lower eyelid at the base of the lacrimal canal with a fine spatula or small scissors, and free the flesh of the natural lacrimal duct so that by making this incision, continuous tears do not flow.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times they apply an ointment to the inflamed joint when it is extended or swollen, as we have said, and then carefully scrape off the excess with a sharp spatula, which is the form of this treatment.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause it to rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, apply a little salt or fine silk thread to it and leave it for another day; then take care of it until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the inflammation is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not fixed in that joint, then you should pay attention to this type of inflammation being cured with medicines, and so it is healed both ways as it is recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to dissect it, open the wound of the malady and take fine, sharp spatulas according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with precision.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it becomes hardened and contracted and is entangled in that wound, then distil from your time into the main part of the sore with a sharp tool, or a hot iron or a salt bath, and close the wound within the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that part until everything that is infected is removed, otherwise a bad fistula will form in the wound, so when you leave it, take care at the beginning of the infection until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that part until it heals.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The outflow of lachrymal tissue, if it is noticed in the nose causing great distress, should be stopped at once; incise from one side to another, but do not close off the incision so as to prevent the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill the lachrymal secretions from the main tear duct, making sure to clean it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and on what is born from attached flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is born sick flesh, which is so swollen that it covers the pupil, or moves very close to or against the eyelids, and strongly pulls them from side to side, until they are assembled together like a battlement.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The surgical procedure is such that the patient holds their breath; then open the wound on that part and gather all the flesh with pincers or forceps; then cut the flesh starting from the edge until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful not to damage the wound during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be such that you incise those or remove the debris we have extracted in the incision of the thumb, or use small forceps to gather them carefully according to the shape they take as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with finely chopped salt or sprinkle it with powder made from a corrosive medicine, and cover the wound with clean cloth until it is assuredly free of infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of infection or severe pain occurs and you suspect a serious infection, leave the wound open and treat that infection with what works for that particular infection, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, making adjustments to the flesh around the wound as necessary from this specific case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should be aware that any cure for this acute pain, whether by natural or accidental means, must be performed with caution, and you should not place your hand on either of these operations until you see that the affected member is sufficiently healed from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	**On the Collection of Knowledge in Illness.**
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are stubborn and resistant to treatment, preventing any immediate action against them. The patient must endure the illness for many days until it becomes manageable.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is essential at the outset to consider whether the illness in which knowledge resides is severe and lacks any other accompanying ailments that indicate knowledge. In such a case, you should gather that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And tell the patient to hold their head in their hands, and suspend those veins with a pin or two according to your discretion; and let that pin have a delicate double prong in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two pins gradually in the body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gently squeeze those veins with subtle force, allowing the blood to flow out slowly, until you see those veins empty of blood and well-turned.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to hurt the patient at the edges of the incision; and if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, hold your hand firmly on the operation so that you only pierce those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, pour pure vinegar or rosemary water over the wound to aid in healing and to prevent any corrosion from the blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to collect everything in that time, then apply a plaster to it which eases the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and the risk of infection has passed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process according to the specific symptoms, until complete healing is achieved.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of swelling in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating swelling with cautery or sharp medicine, as described in the previous narrative, and it persists and is not healed, do not apply any treatment to it, but rather make incisions over the abscess until its mature, and drain all the pus inside until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and shows signs of corruption or blackening, you cut it off with an instrument that has this shape.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded so that it can be pierced with a needle or with a subtle incision (just as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is consolidated and there is good flesh and the body has been separated from the sanity and romance for 40 days, and it is not renewed or infected and no accident occurs to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not possible to reduce the fracture to its natural shape, you must do so according to this manner: and this is that you expose the bone according to the sharp tool or acute medicine, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold of it in this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the tool should be triangular, and the shaft of the tool should be first extended into the extremity in the same way as it curves.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, and that should be the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little further, and turn your hand over so that it touches the entire bone, and you will feel the pain as it comes out from within when you apply your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you will restore the area with astringent medicines as it has been shown.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when flesh and the area are hardened, the material that exuded to the outside returns to the site, thus it is considered lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX**
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	**On the Reduction of Swelling**
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling is at its peak and does not yield to external pressure or decrease, it is necessary to drain the patient, and then continue to apply heat and sucking for good drainage; then apply a liniment made of aloe, fennel, and mint over the swelling, and firmly compress it with a poultice.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is folded in four parts; make powder from these fur parts.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount of pressure required.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply strong pressure to these with a firm, tightly stretched cloth; repeat the suction with scarification; and remove the ventoses, leaving the pressure tightly applied for both day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then ensure it remains very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then hold the ligament tightly, as we have said, both during the day and at night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is well, otherwise, repeat the application of poultices with powder, compression, and ventoses until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the incision of the prominence of the vaginal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When an incision is made in the vaginal tunic, and it becomes prominent and needs to be processed, the surgeon should approach it as follows: take a sharp scalpel and make an incision starting from the edge of the tunic towards the opening, forming a shape resembling a man. If you want to incise this, the operation on it is as we have explained, that you insert the needle at the root of the tunic from the inside out, and then place another needle through the double fold of the lacrimal part, causing the first needle to penetrate according to its position; then cut the location of the double fold and lift the portion of the tunic attached to the needle, rotating it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle, placing it over the humid wool soaked in an alum solution and wait until the thread falls from the tunic.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with something that will comfort it until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from all parts, a circular cloth is wrapped around the entire wound, and then pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the base of the wound, allowing the albumin moisture to drain and the wound to descend and heal within a short time.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it so that it heals properly.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII.**
De curacio de alconati.	**On the Cure of Alconati.**
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, called alconati, is nothing but a healthy condition that occurs in the wound, resembling water flowing out and it is not that (illness).
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The manner of working in this case is to cease the illness on the affected part and turn it to the right, then take hold of its head with both hands from two different sides and press there, until you see the health returning to the parts left behind, and make it not descend, and stop the flow of moisture, and the illness will thus be cured when he sees these causes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't come down on its own, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent is not prepared as we have said, then do as follows: close the wound between your hands and take a thin spatula and apply it to that part of the panniculus covering a small distance from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (in the place desired), until the liquid is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once the liquid is expelled, you then distill the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is treated for the other causes as well, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Regarding the treatment of water retention in the legs.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Having discussed the types of water retention and the appropriate treatment to be administered, according to the patient's condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now, you must squeeze the patient's thighs together on a cushion, and bind their legs tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the patient's left eye, if the eye with water retention is the left one; or your right hand near their right eye, if it's the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand, take hold of the eyelid if it's the left one; or with your left hand, if it's the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then, grip the edge of the eyelid close to the inner corner, for the thickness of the eyelid at the tear duct, and with your thumb and forefinger, pull the eyelid towards you and then away in a circular motion.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the wound's albumen and feel that the maggots have already been driven out by sight.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it should be measured the distance from the maggots' path to the pupil's center as the space between the pupil and the edge of the blackness, which is the cornea's tunic; for you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place the maggots within the area where there is water, and throw them down once, then another time upwards, and thus, when the water descends, you will see the patient's condition over which their sight was lost, and maggots in their wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will pause again before maggots are thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is squeezed and does not descend, you extract the magnet with ease, turn your hand little by little, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gemstones in water and wash the swelling inside; then remove the swollen area or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and egg albumin and apply this to the swelling.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But it is not those of our time who now use such treatment with egg albumin.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not follow your magnet in the treatment of the swelling due to its hardness – which is one of the reasons why the swelling occurs in some men –, then understand that you must take the sponge, named alberid, whose form is as follows:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce that joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and do not stop until you have made a subtle space for the magnet.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then I insert the maggots as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must prepare the patient's sleeping area comfortably so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And consider the nature of this condition so that its nature is calm, and do not aggravate their head towards the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And dress the wound according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then return to that place in that dark manner and cast away the fearful sight, and consider some causes, and then return the dressing within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover this during the hour of treatments or sometimes soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having observed that you suffer from this because the water can easily be absorbed through great and violent inflammation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess forms suddenly and deeply, you should know that it opens up after about seven days, and at this point, you must apply a poultice to the affected area.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should observe it closely and place your finger on the oral cavity through which it is exhaled for several days; this exists in the darkest months.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually, you should be aware of that month's gradual increase and discuss its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in ancient times the student of vision is not exempt from making certain observations, and you should be decisive about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those who are in the art, and one says to make fire in the air with a perforated magic stone through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Although it may seem strange to us in our land, nor is it mentioned perfectly in any of the ancient books, and it is possible that this is a novelty.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices of magic for those who know nothing about them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron or steel specifically, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus being similar in shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the healing of flesh, nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are diverse tissues in the nose, some caused by a growth of hair or polyps on the feet, this illness is called polyps because it resembles those feet represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is flesh cancerous, pale, of thin color; and it is this flesh that is leon-colored, not of thin color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of this lion-colored flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you must do the following: stop the illness between your fingers, place it in the sun, and cut off the nose of the tumor in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then, remove that from the external parts, and carefully separate what you have understood from the subtle process carried out in one part, while knowing that all the flesh has been held together; if there is any cause remaining from which the abscission is possible, then use a delicate instrument to facilitate this at will, without any difficulty.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the swelling is hot and painful, treat it with caution, apply heat to what covers it; or if it is a malignant abscess, cut and cauterize the entry that has become infected and empty all cavities.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then, with your fingers, open the nose properly; insert the incision tool carefully and use either water or salt.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is blocked and you feel moisture in the palate, then know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate deeply as it should, then know that inside there is flesh filled with pus, surrounding bones in the nose to which an incision has not yet been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So, you must insert the tool deeply into it where there is any stiffness, and move it gently in and out, and between each nostril, use as much force as necessary or as little as possible, and direct the patient's pain and insert one end of the instrument into the nose because of a cut or other cause that allows it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this is done, it should be applied so that its scent reaches the nasal canals and settles on the forehead, for the sights of children in schools, which are considered pleasant to those who wish to do so, are a light cause for this action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then grasp both ends of the bandage, one end emerging from the nose and the other wrapping around it, and apply pressure to the flesh with the fingers that are on the bandage, and do this until you know that the flesh is pressed against the bandage.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the bandage, place a clean compress over the nose, and apply this for three days or more until the salve has corroded all that is broken in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a platinum tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If there is an ending of cure that exhausts, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the purging instrument that distills oils and medicines from plants:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small lamp with a small opening, and the inside appears like a cavity.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a small, closed tube like a cane, and the tip of the instrument for purging is flat, open; it has a handle at the rear end, which you hold when you suck in oil or water from the juices and suction causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgers are valuable: prepare from castor bean, white birch, ginger, and turmeric, with black pepper, elecampane, fennel, and anise seed, mixed with lemon juice and made into pills, and taken in the morning, directed towards the afflicted parts of the patient.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow from the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes veins are seen at the ends of the nose, and they become enlarged and prominent over some days, which is a sign to be observed regarding them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this, you should pay attention to the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that is appropriate for its location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its inspection takes time and it becomes enlarged, consider if it is tender, hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation; then do not touch it with a sharp instrument, for veins that are thus cut often bring great evil to him on whom they fall.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a severe nature and not of a dark color, sometimes incision is possible in all parts, then drain the pus and cut through that with caution, treating the area with something that will dry it out until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when the continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when there is an accident causing continuity to break in one of these cartilages, it rarely requires surgery except for certain people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, in the case that any of these causes presents itself, judge if it is a fresh wound with pus, and then adjust both sides of the wound with sutures, and take care of it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you must extract each part from its wound until it heals.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust both openings with sutures and strengthen them; sprinkle dragon's blood and trissat on them, and place a piece of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing over the powder, leave it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the tissues are completely healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique for the suture is to add the solution for continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	To extract those causes that come in both cheeks within the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	You often see these growths in many people within the parts inside their cheeks; some are hard like errant grass roots, and others are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, he removes the cheeks and openings of those hard growths from every part, and then fills the space with a clean cloth while the wound is still fresh, and washes it with vinegar and treats the area with water that has been distilled, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Chapter XXVIII.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the removal of the flesh adhering to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	For the growths that are seen over the adhering gum tissue, which the ancients called albus, he suspends them with hooks or holds them with forceps and cuts off what is necessary, allowing the healthy blood to flow and heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply over the area a sage or other astringent and drying powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, incise it secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter XXIX.**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for toothache.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When, on the surface of the teeth within and without, as well as between the gums, there are hard, rough, sharp edges, some broken off and stained black, and these cause pain or itching in the gums, the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you should open up the space between your teeth, hold the head in a certain position, and extract the teeth with rough edges, which cause similar pain and discomfort as long as they are not properly cleaned. And this causes blackness, acidity, and other issues until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if there remains something in the beginning of the reasoning, well and good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those things on the other days and the second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth require various types and shapes of cutting tools according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the knife with which the tooth is removed from within is different from the knife used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of knives should be prepared as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth from its pain with all care and take your time in the complete eradication of it, because there is no reason to replace it after its extraction, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse lies in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the disease is compelled to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain may mislead you to believe it comes from a healthy tooth, and you extract the sick one; but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been extracted, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know it well, you will see that you sacrifice in the shape of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue; until it is completely dissolved from the gums, and then use your fingers or fine pliers to extract it little by little until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then use a strong tool with large teeth for good cutting or extraction; hold the patient's head between your hands that they do not move, and treat the tooth straight to avoid breaking it or causing greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it here in every part with ease and effort remove it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or decayed, you should gather a piece of cloth from that trauma and stretch it tightly at the end of a thin wire so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction over those areas where you hold them.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification carefully in all parts of the gums and watch closely so that you do not break or tear it further, then return to the patient to assess the malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless attempts at removal; for they do not administer what we have recommended; because many times, they cause great pain in men, which is much more difficult than breaking a tooth or extracting certain bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed on numerous occasions.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with vinegar or mix it with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there are frequent discharge of pus from the wound, and as it oozes, you should scrape off some amount of crust and wash over the wound, and if that crust does not come off, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be delicate, as they are used to extract teeth, with a long and thin tip, a short handle, and a thick base, so that they do not bend when performing such tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And similarly, when using pliers with thick handles, they should be straight when you first open them, so that their short ends are not bent.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	These are pliers made of Indian steel with right-angled ends, and on the ends of those pliers are teeth that interlock with each other and open by a strong downward pressure, and sometimes the ends of those pliers have the shape of the beak of a bird known as a woodlark, which is smooth, and they are of great strength.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is impacted due to any cause, you should place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the location is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a hawk's beak, called a ciconia or guanta.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be done inside with a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions with the pliers or tongs, then you should cave in on the root and uncover all the flesh and insert the instrument called a small lever, whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but strong thread, small in diameter, so that it is not easily broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the treatment is forgotten, it is useless; otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is triangular with a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now, with this instrument, having two ramps, the shape should be as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments used for dental extraction; promptly is done with this instrument resembling a large claw, and the shape is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a triangular tip either bent or straight, of some thickness, not so smooth as to be easily broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisan, through their own experience and understanding of the art, discovers what works best for each patient, according to the nature of the operation and the various ailments; for there are ailments that the ancients neither treated nor ceased with their specific instruments, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is about the mandible bone or any other bones in the mouth that are broken, then apply weight to their healing in their proper place using the instruments and forceps we have mentioned for the removal of teeth, and aid you with the handling of which this part has the shape.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And in any case, slowly and carefully, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that nothing leaks out until all the bones are fully healed; then restore the area with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, clean it thoroughly of any debris and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol XXXII**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth that are prominent among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent in a way that deviates from their natural shape, especially in women and particularly the most delicate ones; then consider: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, you must extract it; rather than attaching it to another tooth, you should incise it with this instrument, which resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp Indian steel.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made over the tooth in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not touch any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to erosion, then file it with a steel file from India, which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of Indian steel and the edge precisely; and it should have small points as with needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days easily, so that no other teeth are touched or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then cut along its length, and carefully remove it with some scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If it is a tooth that is causing the pain and affecting the tongue, you must carefully file the edge of the affected portion to smooth it out, preventing the tongue from lacerating or the speech from becoming distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by concusion and removal due to impact or breakage, and the patient cannot chew effectively, having tried strict medical treatments without success, then consider using gold rather than silver wire for binding them, as silver becomes brittle over time, while gold remains unchanged forever.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the form of the filling is to take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then increase the winding of the thread in a spiral pattern between two damaged teeth, or if one or several, until the material reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, and tighten your hand with ease and wisdom, so as not to cause damage.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the tightness that you apply, with which you wind the thread, should be such that it does not pull away from the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess thread with forceps or scissors, and add it in places as needed with gestures, and wrap them around the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then carefully tie it up tightly with a rope as in Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes loose or ruptures, tightly tie it or those parts with another thread in such a way at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two defective ones, just as you tie these together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two returns to its place in each of their locations, they are grown back as we have recollected, and these remain intact.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only good craftsmen and wise ones do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes certain causes are derived from the bones of cows, and they are made in the shape of teeth, placed at the location where the tooth is missing, tied as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament which is found on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which sometimes prevents the tongue from moving, is either natural and inherent to man, or accidental and occurs due to a disease which has already become chronic.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, making his jaw completely mobile; and then raise his tongue, and make an incision in that nerve ligament according to its extent so that the tongue can be freed from its restriction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or tension there, and this is due to the consolidation of disease, then you apply oil and cut it according to its extent so that you can incise the ligament and dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a wound in the flesh, and do not tear the arterioles, causing pus to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then clean the wound with water or wine or washed water; and let the tongue rest; it is best for the patient to keep the tongue on one side each night, so that it does not adhere again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus flows, apply a poultice of vinegar to the place; if the pain is sharp, cauterize the place with a hot iron, which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cure for other causes, as long as they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On extraction of the ranula, remove the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, certain events occur that cause the tongue to swell, resembling a small, tight ball, preventing it from performing its natural functions; indeed, its great swelling fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth, facing them towards the light, and assessing the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you notice a hard, dark, or black lump that the patient cannot feel, do not touch it as it may be brittle.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white and is moist, insert your finger into it, and scrape away the thin layer; entirely cut it off during your operation; and if a strong wind comes at that time, hold a cloth over it tightly, as it may burst.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work after you have tried thoroughly and washed it with vinegar and salt; and tend to the other treatment for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Capitol .xxxvi.**
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is an inflammation in the throat, there are glands that become swollen, which protrude outside and are called "two auricles". If you treat them according to what has been said in the previous sections and they do not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and if it is not painful, then do not attempt to drain it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a dark color and the root is thick, do not attempt to drain it with a knife due to the risk of infection; instead, wait until it has matured, and either it will rupture on its own or you can carefully extract it.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that one must be carefully incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure for it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the inflammation of the hernia has been calmed completely by rest or if it has decreased at all; then stop the pain from the sun, and keep his head low, open his mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of the patient with a delicate instrument whose shape is as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and be subtle with a blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press against the tongue and show the hernia to him, and you see its true state, then take pliers and hold it in place, and pull it outside as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that pulls some cause from the tunics, then cut with an instrument whose shape is as follows:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to a pair of forceps, however, its extremities are curved, so the points of each of those are on the other side, very sharp, which is made of iron covered in leather.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then take a sharp spatula whose shape is like this: and it should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one wound, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then close the incision with hot water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, apply water from the decoction of myrtle or mint leaves and similar to that of the causes of stricture while the flow of blood is restricted, and then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, if other treatments fail or these two auricles, as they are called, become infected, you should incise them according to what you have observed and described in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	You have already treated a woman for a wound (apostema) located in her thigh, which tended to a dark color, with little sensation, had closed the opening in her thigh, and the woman was breathing heavily, had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and was on the brink of death if more time passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the wound (apostema) had already pus so much that it had created two openings through which they (the pus) were draining.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I should listen to the patient first and then place them in a comfortable position, remove the offending object, drain the pus from the wound, and then apply pressure to it. I should also clean the area around the wound, understand the source of the other injury, close the mouth, grasp the tongue, and keep the leg in that wound.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you remove a large part of it, and there would be little or no bleeding from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, the treatment for that woman is as follows: she begins to drink water immediately, and soon after consumes food. Therefore, you should not continually insert moist bandages into that ulcer for a long time, but rather succeed with another in its place, which will help it heal faster.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply heat and cauterize the ulcer, which will help in addition; and then walk around and do not touch it, for God will heal it from above.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This appears to be a heading or a reference to a specific section within the medical treatise, indicating "Chapter XXXVII." Without additional context or content following this heading, I cannot provide a translation for the rest of the text.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incision of the huve, when it becomes ulcerated.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the tonsils, and they are swollen and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the throat, thick and round, then it is named bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If treatment is as described in the previous section, and your cure does not agree with the patient, and indeed, the inflammation has already subsided, then you must understand that you need to incise the added round mass; and if it is of considerable length, and is bloody, of dark color or not to the touch, then you must be wary of the incision, for there is fear of worsening the condition in such cases.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe that according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, the disease is dissipated and you press the tongue with an instrument that shapes it, and then place a new one, and pull it down and make an incision with either of two instruments called "two-melon cutters.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert anything that is contrary to the natural order of its addition, for if you insert more of it, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, using what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision, use cunning in the cauterization of it to calm their fears, and the manner of applying the cautery is with sharp water (i.e., using a hot iron or similar tool) and you should place the head of the patient on the table, then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, make it boil until it becomes lively, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape is like this.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extremity of the cavity where the medicine is placed should be curved like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, then have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the intrinsic nature of the medicine, preventing any harm to their throat.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And now apply your hand to the medicine, extract it from the uvula for the space of a moment until it becomes darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take hold and wrap that around the end of the finger, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the finger into the cloth in a tube until the cloth adheres to the finger, and do this as many times as necessary so that you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then, after cauterization with cloth soaked in the medicine around the wound, rinse it with water mixed with the medicine, clean it externally with embrocation, and apply healing poultices until it is cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This specific method of treatment is much safer than incision and free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times the uvula is cured with something that is finer than cautery and incision, because it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scigated arabic, chamomile, bruis and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; let them bubble; and the wave should be properly struck with a hammer, and there should be a trap at the middle part of the wave on which an instrument made of iron or copper is placed according to this manner; it should be done with silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the uvula and over it, until the uvula is completely obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process on the affected areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment during the acute phase of an abscess, as it could exacerbate the abscess, and you should only consider this method if the doctor has diagnosed an abscess.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and make a point at the end of it with a hot stone, so that the mouth of the hernia is sealed, because the point of the hot stone prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of thorns and other substances adhering to the skin, and from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may observe substances adhering to the skin, or thorns in the flesh, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract what is apparent from these [substances], which the eye can see, after pressing the tongue against the instrument in front of the light, so that you can clearly see what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be careful to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause annexed to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or let them swallow a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed lion's tooth, bind it tightly with wool, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and is extracted, it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can take an eel and bind it with wool, place it on the table and extract it carefully; or take a leek and carefully peel it and extract its inside.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes are not forgotten, then use a lead instrument in the following way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be sharp and pointed, with a small diameter, and at the end of it, there is a concave part that you will insert into his mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's head, and be careful to touch their neck bone, so that he understands what causes him pain, whether it is from the bone or the spine, or whatever the doctor places his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient has more severe illness that infiltrates deeply, along with its cause, and pushes down below, then he places his hand on the instrument onto it, according to the amount prepared for him until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The number xxxix represents the chapter number, not a translation.)
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On extraction of the sanguisuga (leech) attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating with leeches as described above, regarding the neck of the patient under the sun, consider that you have removed their tongue from them with the instrument we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that small or subtly moving clot appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated wire in the concavity of the needle, and do this several times (as long as the blood flow stops and the clot is removed from the wound), and then apply pressure on the wound throughout the day to stop bleeding.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with clean water, and use its mouth to wash the wound, and do not spill any of it; later, when the patient's condition improves, they can drink some water from it, as blood tends to absorb water quickly.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camphor or a similar substance using the instruments we have described for the suffocation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls in place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operating in suffocation of that is that you take a flame on which are ignited coals and the flame is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is an opening, and the instrument's tip is placed in that opening; then apply the suffocation from above; and have the patient hold their breath at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not escaped until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood, for the blood will fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motes again, prevent the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty and bitter foods, and do not let them drink water, and so it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the gullet when seen; it is similar to forceps as well, except that it has no curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a falcon's beak, which is curved, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not cease.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the entire discussion is about the perception of apostles and the division of their powers.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostles are special marks, of various kinds, according to the way they are remembered, each one in this book having its own distinctive mark.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in perforation and division from each other in two ways: one is for the specific kind of apostles themselves; and also for what we understand about their humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is in the places where bodily events occur, for the apostle event occurring on the head is different from the apostle event occurring on the heel; and the apostle in the fleshy place is different from the apostle in the joint; and each one of them has its own operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some spots appear which cover that they are not perforated but rather a maturation of the health in those or the completion of their purpose.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other spots appear which reveal that they should be opened when crossed, and are not matured according to their purpose; also are there spots that are inclined towards the joints, where a spot appears near a joint, its nature is prolonged as long as you can perceive what is in the flow of its circuit, and strongly corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it's a spot near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it while it's matured, it will affect the principal member; or it's located near the anus, so perforate one that is not mature; and don't pierce it cruely, without completing its digestion, but rather the one close to the anus, so as not to allow its preon to escape and be elongated inside the parts of the anus, and create a fistula, or something done at the end of its term that isn't healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it's not known when the right time for perforating the spot (apostema) is, and thus it's when it's matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that healing has occurred when the pain ceases and fever abates, and there is a decrease in rigidity and pulse, and the acute aspect of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that you should recognize the formation of a cavity at the site of the abscess, and also from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The cavity often occurs due to the hardness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and at the sites of stitches, of the nerves' cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in any similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use the perforation according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to delay perforating it until the digestion of the matter within is confirmed as complete, as we have said; for if you perforate before that, it prolongs the course of the pus from the wound and increases both the pain and the swelling around it, and deepens its extent.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some incisions may be made through the thickness of the flesh or body part as needed, or according to what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large incisions, make a deep and wide cut or sections according to the diversity of the size of the incisions.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other incisions in which it is necessary for the wound to be concave and incised, when made thusly as if bread were being cut, so that it resembles those that occur in cases of abscesses and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in sections with three angles; and of those where it is cut as if with the shape of a myrtle leaf, so too with the incisions of the ankle joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of their kind where circular and lunar incisions are administered, resembling those mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	He who has no such issue with surface lesions, be aware that you must make a perforation, a shallow one, or as flat as possible.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the lesion is large and has already collected a lot of pus, you must make an incision and do not think to drain all the pus at once; after withdrawing a portion, return the massaged lesion within a day, and then withdraw a larger amount, and repeat this process in stages according to its severity until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very young, a woman in labor, or an elderly person with weak spirits, for the animal spirit moves quickly to the exit of the pus, and these people often die from the disease, so you must operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter: when making incisions for these lesions, be sure to clean the infections and consider whether the lesion of the apostema is slight or if it is a deep section; then administer the appropriate remedies from either this or that school of medicine; and if the apostema is large, and the fissures of the incision are extensive, you must apply pressure on each part until healing occurs.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If, in the abscess, a portion of the tendon or its curve is separated, you should close it with a thin piece of cloth or thread from linen, just as when you sew on bandages or razors; keep it moist; and tighten that area after three days; then treat and cure it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, you should administer clean water and vinegar, mix them in a cloth, and apply that to the area where the bleeding is occurring, holding it there as the blood flows.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you should administer remedies and treatments as recommended in various parts of this book and at different sections.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter, and the area of the abscess is full of nerves, you should wrap it in a cloth soaked in warm oil and apply that to the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then cover that you place poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this be changed every other day, as we have said, and then make sure you loosen the crust and clean that part and apply what suits it for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of hernias universally, more according to the way of distinction that I have already said about every hernia in which manner it is a way of its cure by chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of hernias which come in the neck of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head there are small hernias, which are of the nature of nodules containing layers that are formed in such a way; and they have their own names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come drops, and those contain moisture resembling lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling sweat, and resemble them; and those that are stone-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, when you make the extraction of those, it does not cause resistant pain.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you expect those with instruments in the form of which you return them, which is called entromes, as long as you know that they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you cut those as section according to length by cutting through the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that through which that moisture passed, and do not leave from that any cause at all, for new troops seen return if there is no other cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian ointments, if present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that remedy and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that is broken off from that crust.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then repeat the application of that area with Egyptian ointments according to need, as long as you trust that there is no other cause behind that crust; cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess forms with fatty knots, then you insert into it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have a section without the shape of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the section and remove that from all its parts, and use your virtue to extract the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your bowstring causes resistance, then do what I have first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the procedure for the abscessed section and cure it as I have told you; and if the section over the abscessed part is lighter, then it is because it has less pain and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are these abscesses which are in the head on some men and women old ones, and you may discover the abscess thus with a hard, sour, white stone, which cannot be touched, and if anyone were to strike it, they would be afflicted by it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other instances of accidental apopless in the head, except for those that affect the children's crowns and require the removal of their auricles, the treatment for all these cases should be superficial sectioning.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the incision of those in the lower part of their bodies to prevent the spread of disease to lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then attend to those affected by it as appropriate for the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii. (This appears to be a chapter title, indicating the start of a new section in the medical treatise.)
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the sectioning of scrofula that occurs in the collar region. (Scrofula is a historical term for a form of tuberculosis affecting the lymph nodes, especially in the neck.)
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Various instances of these apoplesses occur in the collar, armpits, and angles (likely referring to joints or areas prone to inflammation), and sometimes in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the colon, and the motes that are generated between them, all scrofula of those proceeds from their own tunic, and likewise with the nodes and apoptyms of the head, as we have recollected.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are motes; some are mineral deposits, and others contain humidity, and those that are malicious do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that case where you perceive good disposition upon touching, of which the color is peculiar to that of the cord, and it is inferior at every part, not attached to the colon's nerves or veins, nor to any tendrils, and is thin, be sure to incise it along the dry superficial surface from its initial point in the body to the region beyond, remove it entirely from the body, extending the edges of the cord on both sides, or incise them if necessary; just as we have said regarding the nodes on the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it requires greater caution that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the knife is not sharp enough to fit your hand for incising, or if it troubles the patient, and you make an incision where it is not necessary, then you prevent the flow of venom or infection with potash or other powders that stop the pus from accumulating and cause inflammation, leaving only the affected area until the swelling subsides and the plague becomes mollified and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until the task is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the aforementioned small abscesses, inquiring if there is any connection to the others; if so, make incisions and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it concerns a large vein in the scrofula region, you must be careful not to puncture that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful not to break that thin, tightly curled thread, as you might accidentally pull it out by its root.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with fresh, young wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it accordingly.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you puncture the scrofula completely, be careful to close both edges of the wound and quickly apply a poultice to prevent any excess pus from forming.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you find that there is excessive pus due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to understand where to puncture its root, drain it, and then stitch it up and apply the treatment as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing humidity, make an opening with a surface puncture at the place where the maturation of humors appears to you, and stop the puncture from which pus flows from below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then make another puncture, using substances that you find and resemble those mentioned, so that it corrodes what is broken due to corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the plague already cleansed, then you apply a cure made from generative flesh substances within that it be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii. (This indicates the chapter number, not a translation.)
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Regarding the section of the pilot (or membrane) of the abscess, consider the symptoms of the gulley (possibly referring to the stomach or intestinal area).
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancient people described this section as the epilot, and they have never seen anyone in our land who can perform such a procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	One should have caution in men, knowing that the extraction of the epilot must be avoided, for by doing so, all the veins and the major parts of the malady are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have aphthas in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the malady is not in the gut, one must avoid the section of the epilot to escape destruction which is caused by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, incise the epilot below three circles of the epilhot circles, or four with a small section through the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, making the incision in the bone, not the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the organ are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the ligature to an inch, and then cut the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if, for any reason, they are exposed.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then, insert the scalpel as we have recommended; it signifies regarding the section of the channel for the flux that is of that nature, to that which is broken and for the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is reached at which it is feared that perforation will occur, add two layers of the ligature to the wound, and with that one single action, it is the cartilage that is cut.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medications that promote the healing of the flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis states that the essence of this discourse, which we have compiled, is to observe that some of these ulcers have already eaten into the flesh of the patient, and the malady has spread throughout the body, and the breath of life is cut off from the affected area through some respiration, so that the patient may be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, the ulcer should be left open until the evil of the malady is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; and therefore you should command the ulcer to heal, and treat it until it is cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for myself is that a servant used a knife and sliced into the patient's chest, and incised a part of the lung, and I was called to cure it, and I saw the breath coming from the dead, and discovered the wound, and found the pus that had come from the ulcer.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you must confess that you did not cut either a vein or a nerve, and the pain still persists from the illness, and treat it until the wound is healed by fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not hurry the servant, unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section regarding the aperture that occurs in the throat outside, which is called hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aperture, called hernia of the throat, is a great aperture according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it has two manners, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, it is not subject to healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental has two manners: one is similar to gouty nodes, and the other manner is akin to apoplexy caused by arterial compression, which should be feared.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make assumptions about it with force, but only in those who ask for it.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it and investigate it as it is said, and if it appears similar to gouty nodes, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you cut it off as you would with a node, and extract that which causes it from the flesh and bursa; otherwise, you should scrutinize its entire being, and properly tend to the place in need of cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of nodal spices.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	These nodes have many spices, and I have already described all the species of these in their division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important that I describe the difference between node and exitura with such care as to avoid doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, it is said that an exitura (excretion) is heat and fever and violent pains within, but when the excess (superfluity) ceases, so does the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A node, however, is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it holds a specific function like a lion in the hunt.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is made thus with vacuum, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fat or lean and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a hernia, you must expel that and inquire about the beginning of the stirment which is called an 'intrusion', according to how it comes into its form in the chapter which is proper to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is also a method of inquiry for abscesses and all types of hernias; you take this stirment and intrude it into the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers there little by little until you know that this stirment has already penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intrusion and consider what has remained in the track of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color it may be, then you incise it with a shallow cut as I have said in the other chapters.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity present in the wound, then know that it is foul.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a cut having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As thus taught, raise the cut and extract all debris, with ease, from every part, and inspect the skin or sac, if possible, over it and draw out that pus from the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it ruptures during the operation, extraction of that sac is not possible, and you repeat these actions as needed, and extract it by force only if it does not rupture for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from any cause, whether little or much, the hernia returns, it should be treated according to custom.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that any part of the hernia is protruding, complete the repair with a mixture of sharp, corrosive powders and tighten the hernia, placing a hot compress over the affected area and treating the other symptoms with appropriate remedies until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, you should cut the two lips of the hernia and treat it with something that incarnates (presumably a medicinal substance).
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is pulsating against it, or not pulsating, cut and remove the area of skin that has become hardened (or "triangular" as interpreted from the text), applying a hot compress to stop the pain for two days or three until the swelling goes down, and then re-open what is left of the hernia.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the instruments, and there are three kinds: one is larger, another is medium, and another is smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, aluminum, and have smooth extremities, skillfully crafted to fit the apertures.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods of experienced ones, and they are named as 'albered', and one of those is called 'berid'.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it is of three kinds: one that is great, another that is middling, and a third that is slight.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, middling:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, slight:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, these are intended for those with abscesses, ruptures, fistulas, and bumps, so that they are between the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus, they are made round, thick, and strong, with large needles sewn to them, and they are of ermine fur, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of ermine fur.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they prepare the experienced crows' feathers, which are used to open the fistulas in their concave cavities, reflecting light off those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, others middle-length, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and the tightness of the opening.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced crow's feather:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced middle-length crow's feather:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the experienced short crow's feather:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the feathers are varied and special, consisting of simple curves, and they come in three types: large, few, and middle-length.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their body's humors, there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those humors, some have two curves, and there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of their three curves, there are also three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single curve half-way:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single curve very little, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of the body's great curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a half-moon, the shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small half-moon, the form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a small half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large half-moon has three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a half-moon has three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small half-moon has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are sharpened and cut through the nodules and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large scalpel form:
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium scalpel form:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small scalpel form:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, while the other ends are not sharp and are designed to make smooth cuts during the excision of nodules, avoiding damage to veins or nerves, and ensuring that the patient's illness improves and any pain associated with the excorination of the abscesses is minimal due to the careful adjustment required for such operations.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of knives, which are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great magic:
Forma de magda migier:	The method of middle magic:
Forma de magda pauc:	The simple form of magic:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of glass and look like the rays of the sun, which also produce alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And on the opposite side, there is a hidden spot with a pointed instrument, which runs inside and outside the parts, as you wish, so too sometimes.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the instruments, which are hidden among these times for the piercing of the apertures and not perceived by the patients, are of three kinds: great, middle, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wounds through which the flow of blood is interrupted, and there are three kinds; great, middle, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus skin, round or of some length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these forms of wounds be great, middle, and small, so that they interrupt the flow of blood quickly when needed, and are used when other remedies fail.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not advise using them to interrupt blood flow everywhere in the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as the scales on the legs and thighs, and the scales on the arms, and the nipples, and the abdomen, and the groins, and similar places like fleshy scales.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes those small instruments are made like scissors according to this form; through which the blood is interrupted when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the breasts of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the breasts of certain men are swollen due to the lack of sleep at the beginning, and when the breasts become swollen, they are assembled (or bound) by women, and then hung down.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who desire this, remember to make an incision in the section mentioned below, between the lines of B and G, then carefully remove all grossness, fill the wound with a suitable medicinal ointment, adjust both lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple recedes from the lesions and becomes softened by its magnitude, as is customary for women, then it should be cut in two parts above its pus, forming two similar sections like a lunar figure, each containing the end of the other, so that the main line contains the smaller one according to this shape of the line .B. and .G. And then excise the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders, what is necessary for treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not fulfill the incision of what needs to be incised due to the restlessness of the illness and the flow of pus, then you should fill the wound with a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is weak from the scar, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	**Chapter .xlviii.** (Forty-eighth Chapter)
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the incision of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are due to the conditions of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a pus that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And as for those (abscesses) that contain humidity, these should be incised during the lunar cycle, according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And after all the contents of the abscess have been drained, you should seal it with a bandage and examine it again the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage intact and clean with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of lymphatic nodules or scrofula, you should incise it in the same way as we have said regarding the incision of scrofula above.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague spreads so as to cause putrefaction, then apply cauterization to it as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	**Capitol .xlix.** (Capitol 49)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur through arrows or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks and the string (or cord) is tightened against it, abscesses can form at the site of impact. These abscesses are either due to direct damage from the arrow or through inflammation caused by the arrow's path, which can be recognized by a hissing sound felt in the affected area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is due to veins will cause symptoms visible throughout the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is risky, especially in areas like the armpits, joints, and neck, or other parts of the body; as it is often large, so its treatment requires great care, and that in extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Place a cloth soaked in lukewarm water on that which is affected by inflammation of the arches of the feet, cut it into a long strip; then soak the section with wine and apply the arch, and loosen the garments until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take the needle and make it penetrate between the two parts, and tighten the arch with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to draw their legs due to the two arches being on the thighs.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the place between the two ligaments with a spatula until the pain disappears completely, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply treatment to the place where pus has formed until the ligaments fall, and cure it with a suitable poultice until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess from a vein cut, then you must hold with your hand over the abscess as much as possible at the place where your finger has been, and insert the needle there, and make it penetrate; and be in that thread double until you draw out the other part, and tie the abscess with good ligature according to what I have said about the grape ligature of both parts at both extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might break, insert the needle again at a different point along the entire aperture after making the first incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the aperture in the middle part of it; wait until this is done, and then make an incision through the excess of the cord, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the poultice you have soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and administer the treatment that is necessary to heal it.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Complete the treatment for the aperture that occurs due to nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	This is how apertures (apostemas) occur in the rear and veins, and they seem to be similar to those that occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive work, and by a similar process.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the greatest part of it is applied to the parts of the assistants or the leg, or in any place where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it occurs in its most vital parts; when it is constricted by violence, a sensation of stupor seems to pervade the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an apoplexy that affects the front or back parts of the body; it leaves the patient paralyzed, affected throughout, and unable to move towards either side.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have it in their joints, it is not appropriate to use a sword, because their great strength will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One should make the tie with a spatula for those who have it in their head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a minor abscess, cut it open with scissors and excise that part.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a weight, excise the infected part, and then close it with a stitch; dress the wound and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs from the chill that affects the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Even in some people, tumors appear in the bellies of these individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called funguals because they resemble fungi; their roots are subtle and the heads of those tumors are large; moreover, the edges of these tumors are convoluted and it is from these that growth is sought, and it is from these that a great magnitude is observed.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in their belly there were two parts that functioned similarly, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were turned inside out and split open, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut them off and narrow the opening in the foot where 18 parts (or fingers) can fit, and for the other, 6 parts (or toes).
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in cutting them involves considering whether the patient is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, moist, of fine texture; then you cut them with a broad knife, and apply a hot cautery over them while they are present, as you have to expel the section cut off with force; and if blood comes out, cauterize that place.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is very afraid and uneasy, beware of incising with a sharp instrument; then take a fresh piece of lead and strengthen that bandage, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead string; so do not cease to tighten the large lead after its incision, until it is completely severed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is of thick consistency, then there is no cause for fear or worry in its incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you incise the mass of it, and then cauterize that so it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care so that the disease is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and carefully guarded by the leg, for that is absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us recall certain things regarding this matter.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of hernia (or 'eminence' as referred to in this text).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various factors: either through fissures in the abdominal wall, from which protrudes the intestine or hernia, as is the case with other ruptures; or through a vein or arterial canal that flows from it, as is sometimes the case; or due to excessive pressure within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to abdominal wall fissures and the protrusion of the intestine or hernia, then the appearance of the hernia is similar to that of the body; and it causes intense pain, and often presents itself in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the discharge of the intestine, you observe the position of that mass we have described, with greater diversity, and as soon as you press on those ties, return; it is strongly attached to its place, and a great deal of force is required to introduce water and violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, you will see a mass and it is not occult when you press with your hand, nor is it compressed or ruptured.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to gangrene, then these symptoms will appear: the blackness of the ulcer declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the ulcer is severe, thick and hard, and its size depends on the quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of that part will be hot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or because of gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it is taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias by arteria and vena.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or a hernia, you must then command the patient to take a deep breath and lie on their back; then make several attempts around the entire navel, and command them to keep it towards your hands over their chest, and then extend the extent of the hernia upwards beyond its original position using fingers with great care; and then tie it tightly around with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you should open the hernia's edge over the ligament and insert your finger into that indiction to feel the intestine; and if it is tight or held by the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the affected area, take some oil and cut away the excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your practice or vein, then go around that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads, and through the circuit you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, insert two needles, which will penetrate; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you prefer, leave the needles and let the location heal until the flesh has extended and fallen on its own; or cut away that part when it has subsided and is curable, and treat it with something that covers the wound until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the bulge of the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover as you have done with the abscess and remove the wound or moisture that you find there, and treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the cure for cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have discussed, in the previous section, the types of cracks and how to treat them with medicine, which is inappropriate in cases where there is a risk of ulceration. We also spoke about cracks that arise from excessive strain and the caution required when treating them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cracks occur in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as cracks in the breasts or in the groin and similar areas of the body, especially when they are just beginning to form.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	However, if it is old and severe, it may not respond to treatment, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has been successful in such cases.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said, you must precede and remove the illness and purge of black choleteric several times, and then bleed it if a manifest repletion is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and make incisions on the sides which lead to it; and carefully examine from all parts with a good look to see that no cause of complication from the roots of the illness is left.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And stop the bleeding, do not tear it off, press the places, and clean the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument suitable for that purpose from among the instruments available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it seems contrary to you to make a large incision of a vein or an artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then take care of it with the other remedies as long as it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops in water and the characteristics of each type, as well as their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured with iron is nothing but the species of inflammation alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitis or the species of hydrops, because it is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of tympanitis hydrops with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this: if the disease has already been weakened in the patient or it is another malady other than hydrops, just as it is in those suffering from ailments in the lungs or abdomen and similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for fear of making things worse.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you observe the patient's malady with abundant virtue, and it is nothing but hydropic only, neither old nor young, then the manner of operating on it is that you raise the malady between your hands, and apply yours to press the patient's belly, expel the water from the opening left by the foreskin, and then take a sharp sponge according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both parts should be sharp and long, with a pointed extremity as well as the sponge; however, make them of suitable length, one by one, so that in operating on that malady they do not enter the cavity, and you can handle it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydropics is from the intestines, since you will find that by cutting away from the navel along the openings left by the foreskin in the right side of the patient, you remove a considerable amount of fluid.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydropics is due to a malady of the intestines, then make your incision on the left side of the navel for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is through impurities, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And be sure that your section is on the side where the malady wants to go, so that no excess fluid goes to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then thoroughly pierce the entire cord with the instrument, and insert your hand into that section, lifting it up between the cord and the sinew, and extract it; and if it is the size of a thumb or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the sinew until the space reaches the desired location, which is filled with water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that, and insert an instrument whose form is as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or bronze or iron, and on the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is inscribed according to the shape of the pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it, there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, this will immediately lift itself over the instrument, thus evacuating a large amount of water at once; for if you evacuate less than required in that moment, the patient's condition may worsen due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer from a heart attack as death draws near.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should evacuate according to the capacity of the tube and according to your understanding of the patient's condition, based on the strength of their pulse and the goodness of the flow.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after withdrawing the instrument, you should retain the water that is caused to be retained by the cord through which the hole on the top of the organ is reached; I advise you to perforate it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water and do this for several days with caution, and beware of errors so as not to remove too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the disease and remove a large amount of water, then apply a poultice of sand and mud, lie in a bath, and expose yourself to the sun for a long time; treat it with drying medicines as long as it is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and the bowels, and withdraw the water as previously described in what has been said above.
Capitol .lv.	Capital. V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who have not yet developed the ability to urinate through their own means.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some of the children are born with a hole in their mother's abdomen and the top of their mixture (amniotic sac) is not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should pay attention to the perforation of the sac as soon as the child is born with a delicate and moist discharge according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, in the opening, insert a subtle lead pin and tie it off, and do this for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, it should be done frequently and the urine should be returned (or retained).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if the lead is not retained, it is possible that the urine which has overflowed onto the site will not heal this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	If that of which the pain is tight should be treated with a lead clavicle, as we have said, for too many days before it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it is said, which causes those who are born with it to have difficulty urinating within, until they raise the testicle with their hand above the parts; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it becomes a motley illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the illness is shifted onto his back, and then extend the head of the testicle with your left hand using vigorous extraction, and cut the head of the testicle from the place of the foreskin with a sharp knife, or whatever you do not make any incision, so that the middle part of him comes out resembling the head of the testicle and the pain falls into its proper place as it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation to remove the flow of pus, for it may cause further complications; stop it from escaping and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albiter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis due to decay, corruption, and blackness, and the adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Various complications occur with this albiter on the penis, and it is characterized by the appearance of raw, exposed flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For the non-malignant ones, suspend them with a delicate operation and extract it entirely; then place your hand over that part, applying Egyptian pitch; and after that, cure it with a fine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a dark color, you must cover it with cautery near its incision and the drain of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is on the prepuce of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the prepuce while the other part is outside, then you must treat the abscess that is inside first until it heals; at the same time, you should also cure the external part, for if you only cure the internal part, the prepuce may still be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And similarly, accidents occur in the genitals and prepuce, blackening and damaging them; therefore, you must remove everything that is already discolored and corrupt or about to become corrupt; and then apply over it a mixture made of flour from millet and crushed nuts and seeds.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If it is necessary for blood to flow, then apply cauterization monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A young cauterization is beneficial for two purposes: it aids in the flow of blood and in cleaning the wound when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed in an instant, then insert a platinum tube into the inner part of the foreskin so that the illness urinates through that passage.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is its own, and circumcision is not required on them; and when adhesion occurs due to an illness or a sore), then remove it with an obtuse spatula until the glue-like substance is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to discern them precisely, remember that you extract some cause from the head of the foreskin and the prepuce, and thus it is because the prepuce, when thin, is strongly perforated by its thinness slightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, which has already been soaked in water to prevent it from adhering again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is carefully cured with a sting stop to ensure that it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity among other diseases; however, when it is of our own doing and done by our own will, and performed on children, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and way a lighter loss for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of their free parts, as they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience, which is why I have made most of the artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a new knife and fire; they use glue for binding and a fingernail for incision.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and do not find a better way of purification than using scissors, glue, or a fingernail, because cutting the cord above leads to more pain and danger, as the two layers of the foreskin are separated, leaving the tonic layer below, requiring another incision and ensuring certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, does not ensure a safe incision of the end of the male member, as it easily enters the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, a strange uncleanness often disobeys and corrupts your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the bowels of a child are short in nature, and often move in such a way that it requires no treatment, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the treatment that is performed using forks and ties made of silk, my experience has shown me that the procedure is flawless because the forks are of a suitable size, thus preserving the sensitivity both above and below; and therefore when you apply your hand with forks that are appropriately sized, you make an incision according to a measurement in one moment; and compression of the silk tie contains the bowels from all directions, which dispels any error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first method of operation is that you must keep the child as calm as possible, especially if it is a small one; do not do anything but tie the silk around the hernia, and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then apply that relief in every possible way that your skill allows, according to what it understands.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then prepare everything in advance, ensuring you are not hesitant; hide the scissors in your hand or leave your foot uncovered so that neither the child nor anyone else sees those or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the instrument and blow into the canal, pulling it until the head of the instrument is in place, and clean that which has been added to it from impurity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then secure the site with a signet ring, and tie a small amount of the second ligament beneath it; place your finger over the ligament's location, indicating it with good retention, and cut between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the instrument against the light and remove the head of the instrument; take a clean knife, cut it precisely, as it is better; sprinkle powder on it and place cloth over the powder in which the pus has been absorbed with fresh rose oil; lay it on top of each other until the next day; and treat that wound with cure according to its health.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps for delivery, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some ends should not be sharp and others should be, so that it is not the root of the thumb, and both points have the same length as two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in delivery is when they so forcefully escape the inherent tension that they break either entirely or partially, and this requires incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So consider that you should extend the one from your hand towards the affected area in front of the place of incision and inscribe it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your hand, then extract it with forceps and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If three days have passed and it appears that the swelling from the inflamed incision is subsiding, then leave it until the incision heals cauterized, gently extract the foreign body and incise it according to what you are prepared for.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, for it will not allow itself to be treated.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure that part which the plague has solidified with powders, which we have discussed in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the cord within measure and obeys to the parts of its function, it will not notice itself.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply cure to that part which we have said should be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or sand, or impaction or congestion, and resembles those mentioned in the previous sections of treatment in terms of method.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if urine is not dissolved and its retention persists due to pressure, which already exists in the bladder's neck, then know that the illness bends towards its origin.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on someone else's back and stretch their abdomen away from their back, straining the illness in that direction as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the bladder's neck is constricted to expel urine through the posterior passages so that it is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said, then the cause of the illness should be addressed with extraction using a tool called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and very thin, like a lion's claw, with a fine needle-like canal similar to a quill and half as long, over which is a thin cane at the tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination is as follows: take the urethra folded and tied at the end with a thread or string for good sealing; insert the tip of the urethra into the meatus, beyond the foreskin, and cut it if any cause from the string is superfluous; then insert it forcibly into the catheter and immediately stretch the foreskin back and apply alum to it.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply cesarean surgery on the patient, and incise the bladder of the patient and the hernia with oil mixed with herbs, olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the root of the hernia; and fold the hernia upwards at the opening of the incision; and push the catheter from within; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and when the hernia is brought to its origin, let the patient be relieved from the pain, and do not perform this operation according to this order, but rather enter into the part where there is tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the urethra at the tip, little by little, as the urine dries out the passageway.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, and use a catheter, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient's discomfort relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder cleansing with clysters and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When a ulceration, abscess, or congestion occurs in the bladder, and you wish to drain waters and medicines from it, then use an instrument called a clyster, and this is how it is done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if its origin is at the end of it, it is blocked and closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three actions: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a congestion, which is what is being pushed, and according to the quantity that presses on it, it adds up, as long as some cause throws off the humors, it is expelled, and when they are expelled, they are thrown back, and when they come out long, according to what causes them to be blocked, a clamp is used, similar to what happens with naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humor and throw it away from the body, for the humor is thrown into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp into the vein as we have recommended in the surgery; and push the humor away from what you are pushing, for that humor goes to the bladder soon enough, and the illness centers around that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is crystallized, and that shape is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or lead, which the head resembles a small feather, and leave the cane inside the dressing.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with strong double ligature using a thread, and heat that humidity over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystal into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with the humidity and stretch gently until the patient feels that humidity has fully entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then perforate that circle throughout its roundness; and insert the thread firmly into those channels, turning them as needed; and add to the circle some material that will absorb humidity, so that you stop on whatever you want regarding humidity, odor, or water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you place it in the instrument and make it thus as you have made the bladder, and express with your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXX (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medications, as well as the distinction between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, or sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder proper is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they recount that manifestation of disease and its concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that the disease born in the bladder most often affects children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its clarity, appearing on the sand; the pain rubs against its organ, and sometimes it becomes swollen; and this is how it hurts their behind in spots due to these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that disease is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Among the young, it is more common due to what exists between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose stone is larger and whose cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, we must begin by purifying the malady with herbs that extract all the opening in their intestines; for sometimes this opening prevents the entry of urine after its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then, with the patient lying on their back, position them in a way that encourages the urine to flow down into the bladder, or sometimes it may leap from its place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then make use of the compresses you have prepared, and leave the patient's legs in those positions, so that the bladder is completely emptied into the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then, remove the patient entirely from those things and extract all foreign objects.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then cut yourself into it with a knife.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot grasp the entire condition with one hand, then cover it with oil, applying the tip of your left thumb, whether the patient is a child or an adult, and insert that into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And once the stone is located, insert your tip into it.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly convert that pressure into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that part with your thumb, expelling the stone out of the area from which you removed it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs with their right hand above the stones, and with their other hand to hold the tail of the bladder that is left below, in the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula incidentally which is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It divides into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, but first on the side of the left thigh; and the incision is made above that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made, so that the outer cut is wide and inner narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the stone without making it too large, for strongly holding to the saying that the stone is in the buttock, one should make the incision, and this oversight negates its effectiveness.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone with sharp angles and edges, making its extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it is like a nut, round, and made of the hardest material.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily removed, cover your fingers over it or tighten your grip on it appropriately, the tip of which should be like a lime that you press onto the stone, and do not slip from it; or insert something delicate between them with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then amplify the cut a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut strongly with cauterized iron.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your finger into the bladder's opening and cut into it; then gently press a little inside; and similarly, make them seem as if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it with a great section, because it causes two problems to the patient: either it stops (the flow of urine) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine distillation, so that the area is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May you administer an expulsion of it while it is still inside, or use a forceps in the fracture of it to extract that which is in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not loosen the bandages for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and oil, and then treat it with a mixture of honey and wormwood until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of an abscess, cauterization and drainage are performed, and it resembles a frozen bladder, with urination prohibited (known as the ejection of urine), then insert the pointed instrument into the abscess and drain it, for if left untreated, it can cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder and its contents.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with wine, vinegar, and salt, and against all kinds of things that are beneficial for its healing until it is completely cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the entire healing process, ensure that you bind and adjust both the parts and apply the medicines that are placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urinary tract, causing urine flow to be blocked, treat it with what I recommended earlier to prevent obstruction, for numerous attempts at treatment through this method have been accused of causing injury; and once you have extracted it, take a sharp, curved instrument, which is the shape of this one:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of the triangular end, sharp, inserted into wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a knife, and tie it to the stone, leaving the peg so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the stone, piercing with ease until the drill reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And twist the drill with your hand on that stone, slowly and carefully, piercing until you reach the other side, as urine will soon flow through.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand over what is broken off from the stone of the starting point outside of the stone, as it is squeezed, and it is opened up with urine, and the illness is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not suitable for you for any reason, then leave a peg by the stone and another peg on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then you close over the wound on that flesh between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then you extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then you loosen the ligature, clean and dry the infected wound, which is made in the sore.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to use a strong ligature on the wound, only to prevent its recurrence, and the other ligature above, for when the strong ligature is removed from the wound, the hernia returns to its place and the pain reappears.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And this is what you need to do when you remove the strong ligature above, that you lift up the hernia from below, or return it to its proper place, and the pain appears as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women's kidneys.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women's kidneys are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If one does see a stone in any of those (parts), then the cure is difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their weaknesses is that women who are strong in spirit often become weak in body.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that one does not find a woman who is so wise that she knows when to consult a physician, whether she is betrothed or married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that one does not find women who know this art well, especially when it comes to surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the cut on the leg in women is more distant from the place of the leg, so a deep cut is required there, and it is a place of fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do this, then make sure you get a skilled female midwife, and they are not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking those, then seek out a skilled midwife with a sharp knife or present a well-experienced female matron in the ways of women's bodies, or a woman who has made a name for herself in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do as presented, and command her to do everything you direct, from inquiry about the leg to its beginning; this is because it observes if the woman is a virgin, so make sure she swears on it in the presence of you and desires to undergo the procedure.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, cut it and leave its tip, then command him to insert it into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not sharp, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and feel around the bladder, as she places her left hand on the vesica, and squeeze it gently.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, carefully extract it from the orifice of the bladder to the sides, using your fingers with gentle strength so as not to cause further harm.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert your finger at the correct position of the bladder's orifice, from the side where the pain is located, and press on that area, ensuring your finger does not push against the urinary flow.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the amount of traction should be slight at first; then insert your finger into that section and if you feel the urinary flow, adjust the position according to how much urine is passing through it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the properties of pepper are varied: for some are small and sharp, others large and bitter, some long and round, and they have spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many kinds of spices there are according to what you mean when you speak about this, so that you can understand it fully.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to stop bleeding from a wound, apply vinegar mixed with salt three times and let it work for an hour until the blood stops, then return to your operation to remove the pepper.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Prepare also for yourself the tools mentioned in the extraction of pepper from men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop bleeding from a wound and know that the expulsion of the pepper is from the hole that is carved, then place powder over the area and immediately apply a poultice and binding, and do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for the strong root of the disease will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then apply the remedy.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the acute phase of the inflammation has passed, after several days, the location may be cleaned, and you return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia removal.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white chest cavity, which leaves the opening of the genitalia containing the testicle, and it is called the chest.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural sheath that prepares itself for the departure of the testicle, as if it were another testicle; and it is the opening of the genitalia between the white chest cavity that we have mentioned, which is not a hernia but a tortuosity.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the bones, for these are where this material is discharged, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck upon the bones.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have any distinct color; its color either declines to citron or bloody red, or it is yellow or dark, fetid, or white and watery, and this is the most dangerous.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this water has accumulated are as follows: if it is in the white of the eye that we have spoken about, then the iris becomes red, declining a bit in length, and the pupil appears, because the humidity extends from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own eye, then the iris becomes red and leaves from the pupil, and thus one estimates that it is another eye.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if moisture is between the joints of the fingers and the white cipha (tooth), then scratch from below.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the colour of the humidity, you should observe the colour of the humidity in the aperture where you have encountered a crusty deposit from which the form is preceded; and according to what you find in the trace of the deposit, judge what is within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be flebotomized if it is possible for you, and empty the contents of it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then gently raise him on his back for any reason a little bit, and place a moist cloth beneath him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the attendant to follow the right side of him, extending his finger from one to two fingers' width at the joints of the fingers and at the opening of the anus, and to the beginning of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then carefully take a wide slice and cut through the cord of the testicles at the middle point between the scrotum and penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the second cut according to the same measurement from the line where you have divided the skin of the testicles, reaching the white bone completely.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And extract it, observe, and be careful so as not to pierce it; your incision should be as wide as necessary, and carefully examine the incision according to the amount you can do.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then carefully pierce the white bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, and extend the white bone to its parts; do not touch the cord of the testicles, and incise the white bone in that manner as best as you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise it completely through or into the flesh, especially its thin surface, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of him, there is a sure risk that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if, during the process of removing that from its natural place in your operation, you have completed the section of the circumcision, then return inside it and properly adjust both lips of the opening of the genitalia with sutures, and treat it just as you do with other wounds, so long as it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the intestine is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must tie the vessels that are above the suspenders, extract the intestinal mass, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water is added in two instances, then know that both are hernias; therefore, incise that part as you have done with the other in a similar manner; and if it appears to be an operation to you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then, you clean the wound and enter the sections with wool soaked in oil or olive oil; place another piece of wool that you have submerged in wine and oil, expanding it over both legs and the miracle of the belly; place it on folded drapes and powders, and bind them with a linen according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then, take two sheets of linen and fill them with wool lint according to this form; bind the extremities where they are held by a towel or wool dampened with a liquid, and add them to the structure in the crotch of the trousers, one extremity taking up the entire back between the two, and the second extremity starting from the crotch to the opening of the buttocks, and two other extremities on each side leaving two others over the knees, and all the tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of cutting; so you take a fine cut-wound cautery and incise at the root of the legs, and ignite it according to what we have recommended between which is discovered the white skin containing the water, and then you take cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that wound, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the wound with scissors, cut it with scissors, and burn it with a carefully ignited cautery; incise as best you can until you eliminate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you should know that this operation is much safer and more distant from the flow of pus, and better than an operation with a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you difficulty to use cautery in the time of section or at the time of heat application, or if there is a flow of pus, then understand that you should cure what contradicts you by applying the treatment which is appropriate for it as said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision as recommended; and it is at this point that you must, through the signs we have mentioned about hernias, determine whether that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you understand that you must sever the disease on a raised spot, then perforate the abscess at the lowest part of it with a spatula, and pause the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it should be a wide opening so that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area, press and release it, to let the water drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then dress the wound until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is any opposition to the discharge of water at that moment, you perforate it: this is not done unless the white pannus in the orifice of the wound causes opposition and prevents the discharge of water, so be sure to insert a needle or instrument with which the water from the cysts can be extracted, whose form is preceded; or adjust a small one according to the size of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns, and it is reabsorbed after a few months or around those times; and when it is added, it is perforated in the same manner as before, for the disease will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	**Chapter LXIII**
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	**On the Section Regarding Carnous Hernia and Its Treatment.**
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is great fear of loss to perdition in one's major dispositions; so it seems to me that its dismissal and being saved by some better means is the best course.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And they should remember the operation for those and the specifications of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the abscesses appear in the bodies where the veins are composed and this happens for various reasons: either by a sudden severe overflow which is discharged into the veins, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in itself, but it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very rare is the abscess that is hardened, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the pressure of the arteries, or by the inflation of those areas where the memory of the abscess is already perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of the abscess when you feel it in your joints, and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression in those areas is advised.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this particular case, a section is made and on the other meats as well; and you inscribe the seal of the geniuses, then place the foot over their openings, extract the one from the white of the egg, dilate the suspensory of the vessels, tie them, and inscribe the suspensory that you dilate, that is, from every part of the parts of the foot.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the foot is already consolidated with those meats, then you should extract the foot and inscribe it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the body or between the intestines, you must dissolve that entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the adhesion is caused by a growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion, behind it, you must then cut into everything that belongs to it, and extract it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with warm oil and lint; and take care of it with other remedies as necessary until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that affect the viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is a hernia wrapped up by some kind of swelling, similar to a growth, which softens the testes, making it difficult to move and walk for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious regarding what precedes its recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I note that they mention operation in that second which I have done first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you must sever the illness on a high ridge; then, stretch the suspender of the testicles towards the sides; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your fingers placed at the roots, which are proven to be painful when touched; and have those other assistants, and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then, cut with a sharp blade, using a transverse section, along the right of the vessels, while ensuring the vessels remain uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from every part as we have said regarding the removal of arrows, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double thread, fasten it in the first place where the pain occurs, and do the same again at the end of their course.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make incisions in the middle part at a slight angle according to the body's length, and extract what is added due to putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with remedies for other diseases in which you wish to be free from pus, so that the vessels that carry it do not become clogged, as it is bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it occurs in all veins, then remove the testicles or tie them off with the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the veins and become atrophied, or tie them off so that there is no swelling due to these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending over the belly from the openings of the abdominal cavity, allowing the intestines to protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be of the abdominal wall or an outgrowth of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movement, loud noise, the lifting of a heavy object, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The indication of this, when it is due to extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it forms an angle as if the abdomen pushes back the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of the illness is when it is due to a stone in the kidney, as at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it appears as an apostema, different from the common kidney stones, and this is due to the hernia, and the nature of the kidney is pushed outside of the body.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the hernia is overlooked as a skin defect, and this is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is felt as a ventositat (fullness), and sometimes it moves in the hernia gap, and here it gets stuck, which greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, care must be taken so that the wrong ingredients are not mixed, as it is important to avoid any harmful effects.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation for that is to command the patient to reduce the hernia with their hand into its cavity if they obey its return, and then press your hands against their chest between your own, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then tighten the cord that is the cord of the testicles, away from them, and cut the cord of the testicles completely through; then fix in two folds of the incised section according to what you need to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to do, then it should be carefully closed up.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then carefully remove those chips which are left where the cord of the testicles is, as long as the white hard chip in each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into the space where the testicle is located, between the white rim and the scrotum, and free it from any adhesions behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then take your hand and move the testicles back to their normal position outside of the scrotum, extend the white rim with your left hand, lift the testicle up towards the base of the penis; and instruct the assistant to spread the testicle apart, while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And if there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the white rim, hard.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause, then press on the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a very strong thread of four parts, insert it into the rear part of the rim, where the testicles are attached, which is cut; and cut the extremities that protrude from the thread within, making them four parts, then tie them to any shape in the manner of a cross; and attach the rim, from which we said the testicle's cord is detached, strongly to it from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the bandages tightly, binding them vigorously so that none of the vessels through which pus might flow can transmit any cause for further infection.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then apply another bandage, this time around the phallus, leaving the scrotum's cords free, according to their quantity and size, cut all excess material according to its rounded shape, and secure it from slipping off.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the scrotum, where you will find a blood vessel from which the flow of blood and health, as we have discussed above, takes place.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply oil-soaked lint to the wound; place a bandage over it and leave it in place; also, in some cases, the white cautery (which we have mentioned should be applied with care regarding blood flow) may be used for incision, as this has been seen to prevent complications. And leave the bandage until it falls off on its own.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case of the patient is delayed, then water should be poured over it and applied to that area as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the plague with other remedies for the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXV:
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventose Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates a successful cure for it other than ferrying.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first course of action is as we have recommended for hernia: apply the instruments close to the section with ease; and then dry the middle area around the aperture with water to promote healing.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	**Capitol LXVII**
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the misalignment that is done in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, when the joints are severely misaligned, as we have said, they may tear and the area becomes prominent.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of hernias to the natural constitution; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If it is prolonged for a long time, a fissure may be made in the wall within so that the hernia protrudes into the wall; and this happens due to the extension of the wall in the joints as we have said, which causes the wall to become stretched, and then softens and the area becomes prominent.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with cautery, as we have described above.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is cured by cutting according to this manner: the hernia lies between your thighs, and then the rupture site of the aponeuroses is sliced along its length according to the quantity of three parts.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white cord that is beneath the skin, until it is completely exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the needle and place it over the prominent part of the cord, and press it against the abdomen's point.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then locate the two prominent points on the end of the cord's needle, and align them with one another when closing the wound.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the needle, and do not press or stretch the cord completely, nor cause any damage, as you should be well-informed about the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then attend to the cure of the plague, and when you have incised the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the plague until it is consolidated; for the contraction of the disease does not allow the protrusion of rupture to be corrected.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testes is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and it is important to pay attention to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is tasked with the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back and incise all the cord that has softened beyond the natural cord, and then carefully stitch two lips together in the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, in the beginning, due to the excess of softened tissue, perform three or four incisions and a secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then make incisions between the stitches; and carefully tend to the other wounds inside until they are healed and the discharge falls off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is condemned by our law, but I will mention it in this book for two reasons: the first is so that doctors understand it when they are asked about its cure; and the second reason is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals for our youth, just as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by cutting a fracture.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear to have been touched from before.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration by cutting a fracture, hold the animal and with your left hand press the cord of the testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then fasten the suspenders, and cut across each with a sectioning tool between two pieces.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And cut away that pus which has been excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those of the head, but the subtle head which is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by constriction, for strong constriction leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then tend to the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an absence of the space between the testicles, resembling a female condition where hair grows.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, the flow of that urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females, there is a difference: the womb of a woman over the penile region is like two testes of a man, slightly smaller in size and located towards the external opening just like the penis and two testes of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for males and one for females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those tight clothes between which the emission of that (secretion) escapes, and then cure them with the treatment for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of males from whom urine flows from the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the lymph glands is closely related to natural causes, as it is stressed, and its observation should be done carefully; in some cases, it is magnified in certain women just as it occurs in men and can even occur during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So then, you should have the superfluity of lymph nodes in your hand or between your fingers and dig into them.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And finally, do not stop in incision, especially at the point of resistance, so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of that which is under treatment for healing as it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is born hidden in the folds of the mother's body, until it appears and becomes inflamed outside according to the appearance of a wound (and for this reason they also called it "chubby disease"), so it is necessary that we cut it as we cut the flesh, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Cure for Alticity** (or **High Fever**)
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alticity is when the woman's womb is not pierced or there is a small hole in it.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to sickness that has come before, and it is caused by flesh not properly adjusted or by a subtle and dense accumulation.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the pit of the stomach, or in the ribs, or in the bowels above, or in the bowels below, and you must forbid all eating and drinking and conceiving, and strongly forbid menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the mother, if the labor is apparent, then it is advised; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it out through your fingers or through the light.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the labor is subtle and it is felt on both sides, then it is advised to cut and break it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it should be placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers indicate the most painful spots on both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her limbs extended, and then force both lips apart until that subtle contraction is broken and labor is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil, place it on the area, and apply heat to the spot daily so that the incision does not harden.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the lump is large and thick, then cut it with a sharp knife or a chisel made of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is due to excess flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it away.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted to the patient's age.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the wound from closing prematurely.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer cold compresses from the source.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural birth of others meats, and then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the flesh of the body must not be opposed with force in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail and red botch that happens in the rectum of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids occur from the openings of veins, rather than from those that are inside and continuously swollen; and when hemorrhoids are old and become hardened.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now that we have discussed the divisions of those species and the signs of those species, I will also say which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it says that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases, treatment with iron is not effective.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those which are in the upper part of the body where sensation occurs, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be aware that you should not place the woman on a hard surface, but rather extend her legs with pillows or stretch them out with a smooth cloth, and cut those with sharp razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those parts the flow of sanctum from one of the powdery substances used for biting, thus as with cassia and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then immerse their feet in hot water for an hour, and place them on a cold compress.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision for draining and remove the accumulation and debris of pimples, pustules, and similar ailments.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and stir it with honey, wine, and make a paste from this and apply it to the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess has burst, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions on either side of the abscess and perform lancing at the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse it in vinegar or garlic juice or hawthorn juice, mix with wine and apply to the area; and prepare the place with a poultice until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Maybe the text reads: "May the patient, who suffers from severe pain, be sure to insert what appears to you in accordance with what I have said in the oath.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is inside so it becomes healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It appears you've provided a reference to "Capitol .lxxiv" (Chapter 74) without the actual text. Without context or content, I can't offer a translation or interpretation. If this is from a historical document, a medical textbook, or another type of text, please provide the surrounding sentences or the full passage for accurate assistance.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye's cavity in emergencies.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various specific instances of abscesses occurring in the eye, such as with inflammation, abscesses, ulcers, swelling, herpetic eruptions, fistulas, haemorrhages, and other types of abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments, their types, the signs of those conditions, and the treatment for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise about the treatment of gangrene, which you see most often when it is a putrid wound, and if you want to know how the operation for removing it should be performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider that you recognize if the pain of gangrene at its beginning is sharp, accompanied by percussion and flem, and fever, and sometimes that swelling, and if it causes a certain sensation, do not immediately resort to perforation, but cure it with something that aids in the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now know that you should stop the flow of blood by applying a compress on a vein that has two openings; and have the patient lie on their back and position their feet below the abdomen, expanding their thighs, holding their arms below their shoulders, and binding them with something appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the patient's head and administer the instrument with which the opening of the wound is widened, the form of which will be appropriate for those conditions that are to be treated.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to use this instrument, hold the woman's womb in your hand, and let nothing enter the womb from the instrument other than the womb's point and cure the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the womb's point, then you must place poultices on the texture of the womb's point so that no other instrument can enter the womb's point.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you must hold the instrument's edge above the incision and have the assistant hold the instrument, then turn the edge within until the woman's orifice is open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears and it is hot and moist, then you must quickly cut off that part with a sharp knife.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And after the discharge is evacuated, you must place over the wound a pad soaked in warm oil or olive oil with some coagulant; and apply pressure to the section in the womb's point.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the wound a clean cloth soaked in water with mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then the cure is completed in two days, finding what convenes for it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the plague are washed with water and honey, and then it is dressed with water in which nettle or long-stemmed herb has been boiled, and then returned to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the plague is deep within the enclosed wound, then know that you are prohibited from treating it with iron, instead using the remedies we have mentioned in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the beginning of a new section in the medical treatise.)
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos must be treated when they present in an unnatural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A midwife must recognize the beginnings of labor when the woman experiences contractions and has an intense desire for air, and she is drawn in these ways due to the pressure of the child within her, and she quickly prepares for childbirth, then you will know that this labor is according to a natural figure; the child's head descends first, followed by the second stage where the baby is either suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that her belly is compressed due to the child's descent, and as it shifts onto its head, it signals the onset of the second stage, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Anyone who claims otherwise about this labor is mistaken, for when the child is positioned on its feet and the mother's body is placed behind the child's head and her legs are either above or below the child's feet, or the child's head and mother's hand are positioned in front of her, or she is in strong contractions over her pelvis—all of these signs point to an unfavourable figure that is not commendable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For a midwife to be skilled and subtle in all those matters, and to avoid errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you are showing all the details of those, and what is the purpose in those so that it be understood for what it is and its use upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the condition is situated on a woman's head due to natural causes, and it is intense over her body, and is made difficult for her, and her virtue is already weakened, then she should stop, what women have that, and evaporate the heat of her skin with fennel and mint oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife should insert herself between their split and gaping lips, and with her second finger, or perhaps her own fingernail, she should gently pry open what is within them, so as to remove the moisture that is inside.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the child descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fenugreek ground into a paste.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command them, apply the heat, which should be changed and make him sneeze with the condition; and close his mouth and nose for an hour, so that the child is not forgotten soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the child's feet are forgotten at the beginning, then cover them with ease, gradually reducing the pressure.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a bed and raise her legs up, and carefully position the bed over the ground; and have someone hold the woman so she does not fall due to the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not immediately withdrawn and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to the hand with cloth and extract it carefully, so as not to be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the development of the embryo concerning its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus moves onto its feet, you should gently press those below, and gradually turn the fetus, and then draw one of its legs, and slowly extend them one by one.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If it is situated within the bones, then command the patient to stretch and make him cough, so that it expels itself in good condition, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if this is not forgotten about what we have recommended, then return the fetus little by little until it takes its natural form, for that will be the time when it is forgotten about through forgetfulness of the earlier position.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to use all that we have mentioned, take a mixture of alder and dissolved gum, and pound it well in a mortar, then apply it to the hernia opening in the woman's groin, and the purulent discharge from her lower abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then apply that compress in hot water, as long as it achieves the desired effect on the pains.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the wounds have healed sufficiently, apply smoke from myrrh and hold it over him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the smoke treatment for an hour, then make a stop over a hot compress, and cause him to sneeze and expel the air from his mouth, and remove that, and press the lower part of his abdomen with a light compression, as the effect will be quickly forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the condition of their hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the effect appears in this manner, then you will skillfully insert your hands little by little; and then have the woman extend herself over her belly, and let her feet hang down, and rest on the bed, and close her legs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the patient's belly little by little, and extract from them what is left in the form of pus from their feet until it is ready for discharge.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if this is not forgotten, take the patient's feet and move them violently, and then press what is over the hipbones little by little until the effect can be felt from above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and repeat the process little by little, and command the woman to strain until the effect is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The effect of the treatment should be observed longitudinally along one of the patient's limbs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	He has ingeniously reduced the patient's hand, but if he cannot do that, then lift the woman and make her move.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If moving her is not possible, then make the woman lie down, and with forceful strikes, dislocate the parts of her body, and then apply medications that you have prepared and recommended for such cases.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	When childbirth occurs, then perform the operation on the womb, and promptly study the reduction of the hand, force it back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, ordering her to squeeze herself until it is fully inserted.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The expansion of the fetus stretches its hands and the fascia over them is towards the mother's side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Understand that the midwife holds the fetus's hand and slowly revolves it, to facilitate its delivery.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is as warm and as much as it needs to be, then place a poultice on the area we have treated with oil and lint.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then gradually command the patient to swallow small amounts, and when you have done this, make them lie down on their side, and then command them to turn over, and again have them change position; and cause them to sneeze in this condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you observe the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider it and then insert your second finger into your own palm within the space where it will be evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then insert your finger into the opening of the womb, so that it is not retained and suffers.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently pull the hernia out until it stops at the right place, and order the woman to compress it periodically, and if God wills, it will be removed easily.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twin pregnancies often occur, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and rare; however, these may be due to natural causes, not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And for those cases, whether they are multiples, a second one, and they are separated by the number (or measure), distinguish them by cutting through the ligament in the navel of each; some pregnancies are lost this way as if it were a lighter natural element, but some pregnancies are lost due to an unstoppable process.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver, and you come across what we have said about non-natural positions, then treat them thus as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what makes it easy and subtle, delays it, and uses ingenuity according to every form as it prepares the body for the bringing of health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to verify that a woman who has had an abortion does not get pregnant again, or otherwise, all formations cause great pain due to the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this is in the science of midwifery, that she knows well what is happening to that young woman, and therefore she must be very careful about it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On removal of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When treating the dead fetus as we have discussed in the section on treatment methods, and it is necessary to use surgery with your hand, then you must consider if the woman is of healthy constitution and not prone to any conditions that could lead to loss of her health.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now you must understand that the woman should be placed face up on her back, and her head inclined downwards, while her legs are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife must hold both parts or be placed on the bed to prevent her body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with an oil infused with extracts of fennel, mint, and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And the midwife then places her hand upon these oils and lint, enters her hand with ease into the mother's womb, and seeks the exact location where the cuts are made on the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Consider then the appropriate places: so you should assess whether the child is ready to be born headfirst, and once you have positioned the cuts in its heels, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or if you shave the beard, or on the fork of its spine, or at the places close to the ribs, or release the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the birth is footling, then in the vaginal canal, or at the opening of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And be sure to make the cut with your right hand, positioning the child's curve at that place between the fingers of your left hand, enter easily and fix the cut at one of those locations we have mentioned, striving towards the desired outcome.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and secure another bandage or third if necessary, in the proper position, so that it attracts equally, and does not extend according to its natural form too much.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And consider it at every step, so that the emergence of the hernia is alleviated as it is done in dental surgery for the eradication of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her special ointment to those places and insert her fingers skillfully and turn over what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the baby's part is expelled, then the cuts will be changed to another place where there is pus or better; and do this until all the baby is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is frozen against the other and it cannot be reduced due to its stiffness, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; then extract that part until everything is removed, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And the same applies to the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the hernia is large, or it becomes constricted during its emergence, or is at the top of an enclosed water sac, then you should insert between the sharp spines and split the head and extract the water, or find that instrument called an "alundat," which resembles the shape of the other instruments in the chapter related to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it should be done similarly if the hernia has a naturally large head: then you should incise that with a knife, or use an alundat as we have said; and extract the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is fixed and compressed, then the fork should be cut so that the moisture in the foot can be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not contradict the sight, then you should cut the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdominal pain is caused by an appendix or a hernia, then you should pierce that part so that the moisture inside it can drain.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the pain is in their feet, then the attraction of it should be gentle and the direction towards the mother (womb) should also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is compressed around the belly and the foot, then you should extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the belly and the foot until the water inside them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are restrained and the head is turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked, then insert your hand between the legs of the mother, seek to grab the head, pull it towards you, and pour a drop or two into it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the ovary, then be careful not to tear it; instead, you should first administer a flow of wet, greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; also, monitor the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the issue is on their side, then if possible, it should be punctured; and whatever we have said about the living issue should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in the legs, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause within the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment for the hernias by applying heat to the places where they occur due to the main cause.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then use strict waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman in whom the fetus was dead, and then once again over that fire she became pregnant, and another dead heat led to the other being born.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that he had a long-standing hernia in his belly; it opened up like fire, and then he began to feel heat.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the illness is not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then consider the patient from various causes and apply strong compresses, and reduce it to a bone, and after some days another bone; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they are bones from the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, you will investigate the illness, and extract from them many bones, the female existing in their various dispositions, and already lived in such a manner for a long time, correcting it with a small branch.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you should not be amazed, but rather know that it is science and assistance to it that the doctor applies with their hand for healing arts.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Regarding the forms of instruments necessary to extract the foreign body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of the turn that opens the main valve.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the straining instrument in which the limbs are locked, with two valves at the two ends of both feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this valve should be made to be more subtle than the constrictor, and it can be made of ebony or birch wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each wood should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and the margin on either side of each wood should be one finger wide; the length of each should be one palm and a half; in the middle area of the two woods, there are two ajustments, already fastened, of the same type of wood, whose length is one palm and a little less, and the width across each is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be placed in the opening of the mother to keep it open for you as you turn the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of reed or bamboo according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	You can still use the two additions at the same time, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and their width is approximately two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, you should lay the woman on her side over the feet hanging, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand over the instrument using the forceps as you wish, according to the amount you want from the opening of the mother while the meter indicates what you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of Vertigo as described by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that which is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as contained in the great head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is constructed like a pair of pincers with teeth at the end, also when you need to cut something long, and sometimes other tools are made according to this form, which have sharp teeth as if they were a saw, used to cut and contain.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of healing sparingly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Method of unwinding without a thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Method of unwinding without two thorns:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps in which there are teeth that hold the head of the child together.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A spatula with two ends, used to cut off the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments, when used in combination and with an abundance of the aforementioned spices, prepared as directed by the artisan, become lighter for use in their operation and more useful to people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And for those instruments that are already prepared, it is not acceptable to neglect their maintenance, as the need for them cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second one (presumably referring to a surgical procedure or removal of a second object).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of childbirth begins, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, for if they exhale, it is dangerous.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, take a hot cloth and make an opening in the covering, placing it over the mother's mouth with herbs such as calamine, rhubarb, and cassia wood, and also chamomile and licorice root.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and then placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, keeping it open so that the vapor goes into the mother's cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make the patient sneeze as we have said before, and the second stage will pass quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this medical treatment is performed correctly and without complication, then instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of aloe vera, and gently insert that into the wound, searching and seeking until she finds the second one. Once found, slowly pull it out little by little according to the established method so that the mother does not experience a violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is also necessary to change the positions of the patient's right and left sides at regular intervals.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it is also necessary to adjust the amount of attraction, for she will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and herbal medicine.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to do anything in a hasty manner of abstraction, but consider that what has been thrown out from him into the mother's womb lies in the matter of the woman; and treat it with a mixture of herbs and tetracyclone; for this will cause it to rot within a few days and be dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	If you hear a high, bad sound in the head and stomach, this causes the disease; and therefore consider that inhalations of smoke and other appropriate remedies should be administered.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used inhalations of nasturtium and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menstruation and postpartum:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to make an incision or an extraction.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the delicate end should be paused in the cone and the broader end over the fire, and the smoke extraction should be paused over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke extraction is consumed, then repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children have this problem, as well as the anuses of young animals, which are delicate and tightly closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to perforate it as she has said; otherwise, use a sharp spatula and ensure it does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully prepare that ointment until it is warm.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of obstruction, insert a catheter into the tract for several days, and continue it until the child's condition improves.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that constipation of the colon occurs due to a wound or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with water and lead, as we have said regarding treatment and plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that have resulted.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that develop in the perineal region, filled with purulent fluid, are often painful and swollen, appearing either near the anus externally or in the space between the cracks of the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a mass.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and affected by moist, white pus or subtle decay, sometimes these fistulas penetrate from them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are guided by what is left from them for the exit and due to inflammation; and sometimes the patient uses the difficulty of exit, and very strong it is left from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from those fistulas, some are seen in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And where the fistula is guided and does not penetrate, you should insert a thin, sharp object into the anus and try to erode or cut the fistula when it is not inflamed.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the tension or hair in the exact spot.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any tension at all and see no cause for evacuation, such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and you should limit yourself to treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and the prohibition of it so that the affected area can heal through medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then its sign is that tension penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the flow of blood; and it will cause rusting forever; and it responds to no medicine, nor is it healed by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure for them is the work and patience of skilled doctors over whom they are held firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron is hoped for according to what you have been recommended and what has already been proven effective.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the disease often moves between the patient's thighs over their insides, raising their legs within them, and the parts are inclined towards the patient's belly; then try to insert a lead or iron probe, or an erad (if it is in a tortuously curved fistula), at the place where you know the probe will enter.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that place where the disease is felt is around the heart, then you must insert the pointed instrument directly into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrate itself into the chest, or if you feel something between the ribcage and that flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; so do not work on that, for there is no cure in that place, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it heals certain men's tart.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which one hopes for healing in them, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the collar; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistula, which are similar to a quill of goose down, have been adequately adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the tissues that are adjusted are healed, and treat those wounds with medicines that promote growth and strengthen, and if it heals well; otherwise, it will not heal at all with any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the attempt enters, but does not penetrate into the deep tissue, and between that and the attempt, there is only a slight gap of flesh or bone, and the fistula reaches the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and watch as the attempt dries as well; when the drying reaches the point where the tip of the attempt enters, it is freed and removed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated meats that are assembled like a tube of quill pen and not ruptured from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when you inspect those meats, then the best thing to do is to use a clean instrument to cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts both the opening and the excision of the pus by removing moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then pay attention to those wrapped in bandages or affected by a wound within the brachial area, and carefully treat the infection, applying hot compresses to soft, infected flesh, to promote healing.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines should include hemostasis and excision; when the healing is complete, there will be no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and inquire about it carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if the tumor is hard and between you and it there is clearly a distinction between bone and flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then surgery on it is not indicated but rather through a different path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition is administered in three ways: first, by cauterization, as we have mentioned; second, by securing it so that you can access the cavity and provide the necessary cure; do not perform any incision to avoid damaging the lacert (a structure related to the anus), and let the patient's own will guide the process; and take care of it as we have said, for it is a strong treatment. Or, second, lengthen that membrane and drain the pus from within, as we have mentioned, or through trial or another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats that are in the cut, where you can apply cauterization; and finally, make an effort to restore the whole wound by cutting, and if the orifice above does not heal and the fistula remains open at the anus, it will be less severe for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the margin of the anus, then take the probe of the perforated extremity, which is thus with a needle prepared for the wounds according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that wound wrapped with fillets or around those; then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is deeply inserted into the margin of the anus precisely, then extract the wound from there, thus inserting the tip inside the anus; remove the extreme part of the wound and align both ends, then open each one, leaving it for a day or two, and when you more deeply insert the wound into the flesh, open it until those parts of the flesh are opened that lie between the two extremities of the wound and fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with heat or cold, since it is not for you to judge this so as not to cause a tear; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spindle with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is acute in one direction and the other part is not acute, so as not to cause damage when you do this, thus carefully.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, for they either appear in the anus resembling stones, or those are swollen with sharp pain.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, the pain flowing from them at those times is one, it is intense, it comes out of nowhere, and affects the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are solely external (as if the buttocks were moist), sometimes release clear water or a slight pungent odor continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is deep within the buttocks is to order the patient to lie down, and press until the heat subsides and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should cut or tear open whatever you have between your fingers, and return the intestines to their proper place, cutting them where necessary.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the cuts are not held in place by the moisture and softness of the tissue, take a coarse cloth or glove or a piece of woolen thread, pull out the intestines through your fingers, and then cut them just below the opening, and sprinkle some powdered substances over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those places instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then fasten the malady with lacing in the place where there is a small bite, and wash with water that is on the skin and helps to expel it more easily when the hernia is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external, their cause is usually trivial, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with wax, and cut them, then treat them with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who performs the incision should administer a suture according to this method: take a thread wrapped around and pass it through with an needle, then remove the hemorrhoids from their positions above, and make the needle penetrate in the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread on the side below without leaving the needle, and stretch it laterally; tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong pull, and tie the thread, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do it thoroughly, leaving none untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from that part.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place your hand on the clean cloth soaked in hot oil or wax; press it onto the affected area and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that from the wound; and when it is healed, treat those with poultices or other remedies until they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curing Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Various occasions arise due to the drying out of fissures or the narrowing of openings naturally.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when these become old and no longer respond to that medicine, you will need to open them with a pointed instrument or with your finger, making sure they remain moist and free from any crusty pus that might prevent their healing; and then treat them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enters, and make sure they are cleaned; and then take care of those so they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernia is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a bulge in the body resembling a peg, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the legs and sides, and through these pains you should treat it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut what is in the circumference of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or pincers, and eradicate it from its origin; and then tend to that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned above in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A small, raised, rough, round ulcer on the surface of the body, often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for it is to extend and incise the area, or open it up with a sharp object within the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you choose, cauterize it with fire or acute medicine, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now, the opposite and the same procedures have been eradicated with the instrument that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mushroom is a small, fleshy, round eminence or ulcer on the skin that itches like a mosquito bite and occurs anywhere on the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from an oak or a maple tree, make it strong, and insert it over the mushroom within the circle of the needle; then, with your hand, turn the needle inside out until you have incised what is in the path of the mushroom, and stop the needle at the point of the flesh, and eradicate the mushroom from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a tube of iron or bronze in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforating), wrapped around itself so that the appearance of it is smoothed and the revolution of that is prevented.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the fistula as described above in the cauterization of a wound in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes heat is applied using silver or bronze instruments that have been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is applied with small or large instruments according to those used, for the heat administered to small children should be small, and for those whose backs are bent or painful, the heat from such instruments should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of crystal healing is great and rare:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the bladder of the patient, in which the bag is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished where the bag is attached also with times (or intervals).
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it (the bladder), which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth (not rough), made of leather, and attached with subtlety; and on one side of its length there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, and as thick as a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the animal bladder or sheepskin medicines are paused should be of a size, and its handle (or opening) should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced through many channels, as it is revolved; and the space between the channels should be as thick as the mentioned one.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then I insert into those channels a strong cord of raw silk, either of these; adjust that to the sac; and when the sac is paused in it, tighten it at the top of the channel between two distinctive points at a firm constriction, and I cauterize that part: The quality of cauterizing that part is that you fill the sac with medicine, heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; be careful not to make it too loose or too tight.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then place the patient on their stomach, raising their legs and placing a cushion underneath them, upon which they rest their head, or use a lance; and apply the end of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert that into the anus with ease, and have the assistant press the sac and squeeze vigorously until everything in the channel is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the sac and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to be ejected, have as much as you can; and if you sleep with that for the whole night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May you sterilize those in the solutions of intestinal troubles and the extraction of their pain, then apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or fistulas in the anus that cause pain, then use a delicate and gentle cauterization, as the cautery tools of which children are taught.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**On the Cure for Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already spoken about the division of the cure for plagues according to disposition, and you have thus indicated the cure for some by means of diet, and for others by the use of medicines according to their strength.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to the cause of the plague and according to the place where the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which you become ill are due to plagues thus with the weight of stone, or incision of space or of bone, or percussion with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on motion sickness.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The plagues that are in the parts of the body may be such as a plague that sits on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain plagues, to stop that reasoning and regulate concerning other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the weight of stone or similar, and you have already bitten the tongue deeply and it is a great plague and you fear the patient will fall into apostema (a state of extreme physical or mental deterioration), then you should immediately perform a trepanation (drilling a hole in the skull) and do not delay; and extract the foreign body from the sinus according to the quantity of strength it exerts, if no other cause prohibits trepanation, especially if the sinus affected by the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And this is the surgical procedure, opposite to the affected part; and care must be taken against repletion and heavy foods and drinks.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If due to weakness or any other reason, reducing food intake is necessary, then avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And in the case of an infected ulcer, if it is deep, apply a small piece of roasted olive oil or wine that has been strained.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If it is certain that the ulcer is infected, then apply a poultice to it, if it is fresh with its own pus and the air has not changed the powder recommended, gently press it.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has changed it, then apply different poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to an incision of space and similar, and the lips of the hernia are not properly adjusted for closure, adjust them with sutures as I have recommended in their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the hernia has already been discovered and is not retained by any structure but instead is a small suspender, then incise it and, as soon as possible, treat the hernia with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in that area, and direct the patient to abstain from foods that are harsh: fruits and vegetables of a similar kind, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the hernia putrefaction that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise and remove all of it, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these hernias are due to an artery or vein from which pus flows and they do not subside with medicines, then inquire about the artery; if you find one that is not incised, incise it, or tie it off; and if, in the process, the pus does not drain, then cauterize it.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is easily identifiable; so much so that you sprinkle this powder over them, as the powder hardens before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is this: take olive oil from broken sesame seeds, dragon's blood divided into two parts, and frankincense divided into three parts; mix them all together finely and fill the plague with it, then tightly constrict it so that it adheres well to the affected area, and coagulate it with the dragon's blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, without stirring it, as long as it is not infected; for the medicine will not be absorbed into it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Sometimes it is done alone with this remedy, when you do not have access to sesame seeds and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now performs this surgical procedure on the large abscesses when it is appropriate to stop them and tighten them, and they are fresh with their pus, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has altered them, especially in summer, one cannot understand the position of this powder, so apply what we have said, either by placing on the affected parts a paste made from ingredients such as egg yolks or by applying to the inflamed joints flour mixed with honey and water until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If it happens that the abscess breaks in a bone and is small, then extract it with your fingers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And tell the treatment for fractures of the skull in cases that are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the abscesses of the collarbone.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the colon, it is not different in treatment, nor between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the colon are incised or an artery, then if it is nerves, there is no need for complex treatment but rather to avoid cure by something that causes violent spasms, likewise using herbs and similar things to relax them and prevent contraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And it does not matter what the cause of the pain is, for the substance of the nerves is compressed and their continuity is to the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with lighter medicines, also with washing using two types of water, sometimes with oil or without oil, and drying when washed with hot water and other remedies afterwards according to this method, and then moisture is added.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is severe, then administer a stitch, or tie the edges together, and soon after treat it with poultices until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the plague is deep or causes pus to form in a low and closed part of the body, then perforate it in the most vulnerable spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the plague has already cut into an artery and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if that is required to stop it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine in the throat or completely cut, but the veins in the neck are saved, then secure the edges of the wound with stitches over the throat's cane and do not touch that part; later equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and appropriately tighten it with decent stretch, and leave it for several days; and treat it with ointment in places where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already taken hold in the bone, then you should probe it and, if it contains pieces of bone, extract as many as possible; leave what is not attached so that the plague can disperse and its removal from the body be facilitated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle that powder which has been recommended over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the plague has caused a fistula, then treat it with water from the source of its origin, which will be discussed in its respective chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding the plagues of the collarbone or similar when they arise between the shoulders and are caused by a bruise, cut, or lance, or any other similar injury.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or a cut, and the depth of it can be seen, then consider more carefully the plague's symptoms as the illness progresses; you should know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent, then you should apply dust to it from the first hour, and do not press on it so that the wound is not retained in depth and returns to the heart and causes harm to the malady, but rather apply a soothing ointment to it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you do not have a suitable ointment, then apply clean cloth to the wound's surface so that it absorbs what comes from moisture; and make the malady rest on the wound so that whatever is appropriate runs into it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If after three days or more the wound has healed without causing spasms or tremors in the heart and no constriction of the blood vessels, and other good dispositions appear, then you will know that the wound is cured; and thereafter treat it with cold compresses and other remedies until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it remains open for a long time, then you will know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to incision of space or bone, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, treat it with the method previously described for stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the treatment has not worked on the bone, and you have already incised and extracted pieces, then turn to the wound, and try to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside, as the extraction of them delays healing of the wound.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that occur in the other parts of the body, the young (or quick) healing in treatment is what we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the belly can be great, or small, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From some great observations, one sees the intestine or hernia, so that its intrusion and the suture of it are either very violent or very subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to achieve in another way, and I know that the reduction of them is more difficult if one does not address their intrusion into their place as soon as possible, because it opens up and thickens so that the insertion of them becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best disruption is intermediate, because in that case the reduction of the hernia is neither difficult, as it is in the two aforementioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four ways, but two sutures are common that suit in the sutures of other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other wounds communicate with the others, yet they are more specific to the wound of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it says when the wound is small and there is no apparent cause in the abdomen for it, and it becomes difficult to reduce, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the narrowness of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia has swelled up due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is so, then know that you should bind it thus, immersing a sponge or cloth in warm water, or taking watercress, fennel, and spices, and wrapping them around the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, it has been observed that vinegar is more effective than water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And once you have resolved the inflammation, moisten the hernia with water in which herbs like althae and mulleins are steeped, for they help to relax its contents slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the contents of the hernia cannot be reduced by this treatment, then you may need to cut the disruption using a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the initial treatment is better when it involves no cutting, and there is no need to dry it abruptly, but only a gradual supply of nutrition.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the acute pain, and in another part not acute, and at the delicate extremity, let there be no subtlety of space; first make it slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the hernia is enlarged and it has protruded, you must return it to its natural form and position, in its proper place, if possible; for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the hernia is extensive and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is located in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must elevate the patient's head and feet higher than the hernial openings.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you must always direct your intention and consideration towards making the affected part higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And also ensure that you administer this in large and small pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the smaller pains, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, hold it with your hand, and adjust the edges of the wound, and then gradually uncover from one part to another, searching for any cause that might be hidden, other than the suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it at the edge of the disruption on the little finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid putting any pressure on both ends of the thread, except for the two ends that remain within the wound, as you make the needle penetrate from one side to the other; and when you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the needle, they form four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tightly wrap the thread double around the needle, sometimes from two sides together, and add both lips and the wound by a decent addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and tie another needle to it, just as if it were the first needle; and do not cease doing this for the needles until you have fully resolved the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the thin needles pierce the flesh slightly; the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, therefore they should be of a moderate thickness in both respects.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is important that the needle be inserted into both ends of the hernia at once, so that the flesh is not pierced too deeply and the hernia opens up before its hardening.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the stitches should not be too long, so that the hernia is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so as not to cause further harm to the patient during their sleep; rest upon the wound pulvils spread out from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the illness is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of sutures with needles are most convenient in small wounds, as they can be applied to the suture using just one needle, or two, or even more around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is fundamental: it consists of administering a suture to the four ends, from the cord and two ends of the limb, at once, using an needle with thread meticulously and carefully wrapped around it in terms of fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle to its original path from which it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, thus securing the suture like a drape with which the drapes are tightly bound.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, hold the amount of the thickness of your finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch prevents men from urinating.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I have closed the wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which was infected by a knife, and it was a rupture of a major plague, about two palms wide around the intestines near the middle of the wound in the member; and then I have reduced that after the wound had been open for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in about fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and he recovered fully; and after that, I have observed him for most years, and he has been in good health.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; but by a miracle, because you did not cure him with ointment, for the place where the wound was was not reached by any ointment or medicine, yet you applied your hand to the wound twice a day and washed it daily with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of suture according to the account of the word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin to suture the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle penetrates the wound and reaches its center according to the rule, leaving the end of the thread you inserted into the wound; also, insert the other end of the thread from inside towards outside in the other extremity of the member.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have succeeded in making it penetrate, make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the member from inside towards outside; then leave the end of the thread on this side, and insert the needle into the other extremity of the opening from outside towards inside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make a penetration there with your penetration, which causes that to penetrate into the body at the end of the eye, which is in the opening of it so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin with this procedure on the side of the body and with that end which is from the eye on the other side, extract the needle from the thread it penetrates, reduce it into that thread and with the end of the eye that is on the opposite side to this end, extract the thread that is attached to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this once and then again, and do it again and again until you have eliminated everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this method of stitching is that you stitch with a skin stitch, by which you sew the flesh, in such a way that you stitch the eye once from the side of the thread's end, and then turn it again until it is completely closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second specific type of suture that is entirely worthy of note, which certain healers call "Galia," involves stitching with a second thread, one that some doctors use, adding to the initial wound according to what nature requires; and they apply the tip of one part to the other and the tip of the opposite part to the remaining end, and this is done as you direct.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Ensure that you hold the needle at the tip of the mirror in your dominant hand, and make it penetrate the wound from outside towards the inside, passing through both ends of the limb; then, turn the needle around and make it penetrate from inside out, going through both ends of the limb again.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then, turn those threads around and make some of them penetrate from inside out towards the outside in both ends of the limb other than the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common loose suture, and it is a suture of which one should have memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	They may also say that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles; then you enter some thread into each, and begin to introduce the needle from this one into the other on the opposite side according to the suture of those which join the flesh together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the abdomen, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment of plague can be compared to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which is because when you perceive the recent plague in its initial stage where air alters it, you reduce the swelling, cook it, and stitch it properly, then place a poultice on that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply hot compresses to that place until the pain intensifies and the fluids discharge, and they are healed and become firm; and then treat that wound as is done with other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have access to medications, then focus on this treatment, as it begins to improve after three or four days, just as it was taught to you, until it heals, so that you do not need other complex remedies for simple ailments.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound might communicate with other vital parts, then cover it with a cloth dipped in pure oil or perfumed oil and place it around the affected area between the joints, and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in the intestines, as it occurs a few times, then apply a cold compress with black stippling clay, especially when the inflammation has spread to the hernia and there is an exit penetrating the cavity of the organ.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that a hernia involving larger intestines has a lighter recovery than one involving smaller intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And the hernia called "inguinal" is difficult to heal because it does not receive healing from any plague; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, and the magnitude of those veins, and the subtlety of the body part where it occurs, and the proximity of that area to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your established method to ensure the hernias are fully contained.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been left in the space and has turned red or black, then tighten the bandage over the affected area to promote blood flow, as there are veins and arteries within the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut into this other matter, hold the two ends of the thread pendant from the wound, so that by removing the bandage and draining the pus from the wound, you can alleviate the attraction of it.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	A recollection of hernias when they occur in the abdomen.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the abdomen and is small, it is possible for some people to have it restored, so you may see someone who was previously plagued by a hernia in their stomach after being pierced by a lance, and the hernia had an old fistula and experienced issues with management and air flow.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you should pursue the cure for it as if it was not sealed in the healing of it, but rather focus on that which brings about health and the place becomes consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having observed the location already consolidated, beware of taking on additional burden over the illness that has affected them in their abdomen; and do not further aggravate this ill accident by eating or drinking, and soon immerse yourself in a bath and exercise according to your said conditions.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones say that when a hernia in the abdomen is small, it should be treated as follows: you take scissors from large heads; then adjust the two edges of the hernia and place a scissor from those that keep the mouth open over both edges of the hernia; so when you grasp them and tighten your mouth, cut off the head, for it sticks and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another scissor near the first, and do not stop doing this with scissors one after another according to the quantity of the entire hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return it and contract the hernia; and cut off those attached caps within the abdomen until the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia is a thin thread taken from the hernia of an animal, finer than a needle, so you take the end of these herniary threads, bare and smooth, and bring the end of them to the thread, wrapped, and then insert that thread through needles and sew with that, and reduce it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle hernias, then at times there is only subtilization, and not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the healing of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every wound and ulcer, as it ages and becomes old, turns into a fistula, not healing and remaining open for a long time, then in any part of the body, it is generally called a fistula, and we call that our ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to truth, is a wound that is hard, white and without pain, and has a hollow cavity just as there is a hollow cavity in the pain of use; and for this reason it is called acute pain, i.e., the injury.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people's bodies that this humidity becomes hot, and often the humidity is absorbed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is increased, and sometimes it is decreased, and sometimes it is thin, and sometimes it is thick.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said this in the previous division when you mention the sores: that every ulcer which does not heal or is not in a bare part of the body, is caused by one of these reasons: either through lack of blood flow in the body; or through evil spirits; or because between it and the skin there is hard, forbidden growth of flesh; or it is very heavy; or because the pus within it has become putrid and the matter that enters it is of bad quality; or because the medicine for its cure is unsuitable; or when corruption reigns in the region, and there is a plague; or due to the nature of the region, as is often the case in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and it takes a long time for an abscess to heal naturally; or because there is bone within it, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It has already shown all those causes and the signs of those, as well as their cure through medicines in detail.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it covers that you should know the cure for a fistula caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skin, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints, or any joint composed thusly from hand and foot; and those are ones that result in proximity to the main member and similarly.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, of these fistulas that are according to this manner, is among the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with those is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if the depth of the fistula does not reach these places, which are mentioned, wait and trust in its healing, and desire to gain knowledge about it, then take a probe or a scalpel, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, you investigate it with care.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a delicate probe, for the weight of their body's fluid can displace and curve the twisted nature of the fistula.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula exhibits extreme horror, it is not appropriate to attempt any treatment on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, sanitize the orifices for their horror, because the moisture by which you clean that one should also affect the other orifices and cure them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you should carefully inquire, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or close, or if it is a fistula that only exhibits extreme horror, and this lies entirely within the scope of your strength, with your questioning, with which you question the malady, and the discovery of the pain due to your compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs of accidents at the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have carefully considered all those causes and come to a clear conclusion, you will then proceed to treatment according to your judgment: for you consider whether the fistula appears near or far from a joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in one of the places that are characteristic of it, and speak about it.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you examine the fistula according to what has been said about its description, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and what has formed in the hole of the flesh, or of the wound and similar things, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rule, then you must incise it in the place where it is most pronounced as far as possible, and thoroughly clean it of all corrupt flesh; and then apply certain wrapped hot compresses, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have comprehended with your hand.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And for this, they use some cautery instruments to open the space, as it is often necessary to do when the acute medicine corrodes everything that is solid in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then, they restore what was damaged with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed with this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to confirm this, then examine and dry it according to what we have recommended; however, do not neglect any cause related to veins or nerves or important limbs, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no infection or discoloration, then clean it until the corruption is entirely eliminated; and then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the wound is not clean and flows as it should, you will know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; then uncover it again and carefully perform the reason for its treatment and purification with the last strengthening force, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is clean, then it is good; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep, distant parts of the body, which has not been reached, and thus your effort in that place is only to wash it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small, or it is within your power to throw it away, then throw it with subtle forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and from none of them leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of discomfort arises from moisture, and upon examining it there is no fear or mistake, then incise those inflamed or fleshly parts, and dislocate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have the skill to extract bones from your patient, then focus on the affected area where the problem originated, and leave it until you can safely remove the infection; ensure that the wound remains open while you wait for the infection to heal, and be careful not to constrict the section you incised during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Previously, if you are hesitant, apply a hot compress or one soaked in olive oil, or with Egyptian bitter water, or any of the green oils, for when these inflammations subside, and the bones can be separated from their adhesion, and this attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as a thigh or leg bone or similar, and the corruption affects only its outer part, then carefully cut away this corrupted portion, but do not remove the whole limb; restore the wound by repairing its blackened and corrupted state.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part that is corrupt is great, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close and completely cut out that part in the place where the corruption has occurred, and once it is healed, treat it.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to hold that in place, serving as an example and assistant to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around XXX years old experiences pain in his thigh, and the pain arises from within due to an infection of the deep tissues of the body until it reaches the thigh, it is a matter of apoplexy or a great apoplexy, and not caused by an external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore, the duration of his suffering increases due to the error of the doctors, as the apoplexy expands, and pus-filled matter accumulates, and his treatment is prolonged until the leg becomes fistulated, causing terrible wounds that can penetrate and affect the body's moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus many doctors have treated it for about two years, not focusing on the knowledge but on the art, since that is how you are called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hernia and the substances that were flowing from it through these terrible pains; and already the condition of that man was entirely stabilized, and the color of him was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And thus you insert the probe into one of these hernias and conquer the probe with the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then you carefully examine all the hernias and find those that are causing trouble from every part of the hernia.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And thus you carefully cut and incise over one of these hernias until you discover a part of the bone, and you find that it is corrupted, hard, and degenerated; and already a part of the hernia was rotten, corrupted, and destroyed within as the material had penetrated into the mesenteries.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I believed that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already washed it away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I will pause the restoration of the disease with curative medicines for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I will repeat and uncover over the bone according to the first discovery, and seek any continuing corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will secure what appears to me as that corruption, and then I will make holes in it to effect the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I will uncover it again, and I will not cease to carefully cut the bone little by little and perforate the restoration of it, but it is not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and extract that from its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly strengthened and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And further surgery of it and its removal is not necessary unless for the arrangement of its fragility and the scarcity of its tolerance, and fear of death, because it becomes weak at all times due to excessive evacuation leading to fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is achieved through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its arrangement in the body is good and returns its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and causes no opposition in walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If indeed the bone protrudes from the body, then you should act as follows: take lint and tightly wrap that around the end of the protruding bone, and ask someone to extend it; then wrap a thicker lint over the first one; next, place this lint on the flesh left by the bone, and extend the tip so that you can pull the flesh away from the joints below, and uncover the flesh where you want to make the cut, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a knife or table beneath the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be careful with the sawing over the corrupt place little by little, for if the corruption is in the concave of the bone and does not appear in its sensation, you must force the saw another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it is sometimes a continuous separation from one side to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in part of it, then you must expose the flesh from all parts; and place a knife beneath, and saw first the one that has the corruption while continuing the sawing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut through that corrupt joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but requires skill.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must investigate where the corruption appears to you, and open it up, and remove it according to any possible disposition that is at your command, and with skill correct any deformity that does not cause you pain or affect nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels are suitable for cutting these bones, as they depend very much on the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity; so that it is necessary to prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for any operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the nature of the instrument of which you stand in need; since you possess great learning and experience in the methods of this art, and are a witness to the ways of various ailments, at this time you will have understood what is appropriate for it among instruments for any ailment.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your training, the very same tools that you will employ according to your experience gained from others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the shape of a starred key, and its points are shaped like the points of a sawtooth.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to apply this treatment unless the joints' heads are rubbed when they are corrupted or the mouth is widely open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the major razor compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the minor razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved more and its edge sharper, and the boy's hand cut cautiously with a descending motion.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of the scalpel with its concave edge:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another very thin scalpel:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another scalpel with an extremely curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small scalpel resembling a hook:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the chisel-like instrument that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller chisel:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another chisel; this one resembling a ray, with its end as sharp as a saw, and used in various places for cutting bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of cutting that is suitable for reason of one who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and of sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and in appearance it covers all the causes that we have mentioned of razors and scissors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extreme points and of the locking of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if, after treating that corruption with those remedies, the cure does not follow, or if the corruption continues to spread to other parts that do not suffer from any cause, then you must know that you should cut off that member within which this evil spreads, so that it may escape death or great harm to that part.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it has been cut, since fire had consumed it, or if you see the darkness increasing until it affects that part of the body which was once healthy and now consumes the entire body; therefore, make an incision on that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it seems to be caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources, such as from a scorpion's sting or a viper or nettle, and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is on the end of the finger, you make an incision into the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it seems to affect the hand, then you make an incision at the root of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the entire finger of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you change your mind, then incise the arm inside the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption or change surrounds the elbow, then that is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause related to it in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, then do as you would with an elbow, incising it inside one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter within the toe, then incise the leg inside the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then it offers no cure but dismissal, leaving the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or cutting off a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part which you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over it; then extend the instrument a ligament between the parts left, and extend the minister another ligament on them; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without any space until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or cut off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with cloth from all sides to prevent any contact with the area, and ensure the patient's injury is aligned and healed carefully.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the operation, you cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powders to constrict the blood flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member with ligaments appropriately, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to take a man in his foot, this accident which you and I have recommended, which is caused by the heat turning black on his foot resembling the burn of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption is first caused in the inside of the foot, which tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for this treatment, as he sees the cure going to the member with the violence of his pain and heat, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago, that treatment of this corruption in the foot's arch became indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it overcomes me, and so I perforate the accumulation to reflect that superfluity with water that stops the flow of medicine, appropriating the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected, and we begin to go to the other arch within that we began in the foot.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the surgeon insists on incising the patient's hand, and I do not want to do it fearing the consequences of that superfluity, for if you do not hold back, the incision in the patient's hand will be mortal, as the virtue of the malady was about to cease.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and forced me to prepare and incision in the man's hand entirely, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this story merely to assist those who suffer from this malady, but also to explain its cause and how it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of fever and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged so as to form a collection of pus, then it is cut open and discharged, and the place remains hollow as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is relaxed, and no further corruption penetrates, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a fever, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption encompasses an entire member, it is then called a fistula and not incurable.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is to incise that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with a thread, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord does not adhere and that that corruption does not continue due to its last consequences, and if the cord has passed through the wall, then cure it with a cloth enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the arm that has them emits a foul odor, then enema with Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and spices, adjusted in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the desired strength.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the affected sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the foot, and leave the medicine on it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that precious substance; do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain is alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, the sinus is cleansed with water from ashes, when this medicine is not available to you; take ash from a fireplace, mix it with water, and use that to cleanse the sinus until you feel that it has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then cleanse the sinus with water and honey, mixed with a third part of cinnamon; or with wine and honey, for the honey cleanses and washes, while the wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has gone down, then cleanse that area with water that helps bring forth the flesh's humors.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyaphinic (a medicinal substance) and dissolve that oily crust and apply it firmly; or cleanse that area with some medicines in enguent (a paste-like preparation) and others that have the properties which I have already described in the treatise on enguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the swelling are tight through which the catheter of the cleister cannot pass, then gradually enlarge them with a small iron, and apply heat wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon enguent until they are enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices seem to be wide enough, then you should suture the edges of them and leave as much quantity of them open as is needed for the cleister to pass through.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice through which the arm passes is elevated above its attachment, then dry it in the lowest place on the patient, where the arm runs between, for when the arm is compressed in the depth of the shoulder, flesh is generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the shoulder socket within the environment of the bone at a lower place as you wish, then pierce and prepare the member so that the arm can run from it lightly according to what you have prepared and without any cause for the arm to be retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied over the shoulder, appropriately adjusting those on a cloth to extend them over the area.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity as to allow for complete coverage of the shoulder; then, using scissors, cut them along the right side of the shoulder socket opening slightly wider than the shoulder socket itself; extend another piece of cloth soaked in ointment over it according to the size of the opening, and place it on top of the previous one at a distance from the shoulder socket so that the arm's movement is not hindered by the large cloth and it does not adhere for too long.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is above the opening of the sinus, which purges at all times so as to draw out what is retained in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus consider the location of that sinus, whether or not the patient feels pain in it, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter discharged from the sinus opening has become adhered, or a strong adhesion has formed, then pull it gently on the third day, and when you remove the pain, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If from the sinus a subtle, thin space is opened, do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it, for healing itself takes place, for sometimes it generates new flesh in the patient's wounds, and others experience the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a brash indigestion persists for several days, you will know that the intestines do not adhere; and if the adhesion of the intestines is prolonged, then adjust the treatment with drying medicines, for if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried as with an astringent when there is too much superfluity added to them.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last part of the treatment is to take a drying agent and dissolve it in rose oil, and then apply it to the affected area, and wrap it tightly, and use it as directed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work even when there is no pain: take a drying agent, honey, if it is thin, use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, mix them together and grind them into powder over fire, wrap this in cloth and apply it tightly to the intestines; and also wrap that with the honey you have noticed as thickening, and sprinkle that on the cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times they administer to him long extracts and roots of celestial lilies (celestial lilies), and flour of nettle and centaury, and use these simples either pure or mixed, triturate them and sieve and sprinkle over honey which has been recomposed; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain persists and is not alleviated by this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the innards of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of nail infections, calluses, and the addition of cuts to the finger, and its amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici (calluses) is an apostema (infection) that arises from the nail of the finger or toe, and it strongly affects other digits as well. When prolonged without treatment, it becomes more serious, either through cauterization or corruption. It emits a brash within that corrodes the root of the nail, and it can corrupt the entire nail, reaching the bone inside, causing a foul odor. The extremity of the finger is affected, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have attended to what we have mentioned in the previous section and do not confirm your treatment, remember that you must incise with a sharp instrument all the superfluity that is collected in the joint and then cauterize the wound nearby, for cautery brings relief to such things.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is strong and the joint is healthy, but the additional fluid in the joint causes the flesh to be squeezed from within, and you begin to puncture and hurt it, remember that you should make a slight cut at the angle of the joint that punctures the flesh, and push it aside, cutting the flesh easily, and apply something over it containing medicinal, corrosive substances until everything is completely removed; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, remember that you must cut into the bone and extract it, for never is a bone healed when it is corrupted within.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If rust and corruption are present in the said part, then you incise it into one of the nuts according to memory, and subsequently treat it so that it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is an urgent need for percussion or scraping and the pain is intense, then begin by applying fleebotomes to the affected area, and carefully dry the nail with a sharp, transverse section just above it, ensuring that the cut does not penetrate the surrounding flesh, as this could cause severe pain and lead to the growth of excess tissue at the site; subsequently, treat the area to alleviate the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of many people, is characterized by a high proportion of flesh, or conversely, a predominance of bones, or yet again, a thick nail bed.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some of them are born in the joints, or it is their nature to be present in certain nuts of the body.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born into certain ignorance of this knowledge will not suffer, but he who is born with weak joints is easily afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is slight, and you must insert your blade into their flesh at a shallow angle.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with the disease of the joint, treatment is difficult; therefore, guard against the excision of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born with such ignorance, take care to make an incision at the beginning in their flesh around the bone with a round blade, and then use a suitable saw to close it, and be sure that it heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	In the consolidation that occurs between the joints due to various occasions or by nature in a person who does not have them, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar, then take care to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets some warmed oil so that the joints do not harden too quickly, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until they are consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if similar consolidation occurs on the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding the incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins, when they become varicose, are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid, which occur most commonly in the legs, especially in the calves of those who walk, work, or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	So then, you will understand that you must administer a purge to the body from black choler at certain times with a strong expulsion, and also draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of their pain is according to two methods: one is to incise and drain that black blood, and the other method is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick blood clot is dissolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, then firmly hold the patient's thigh at the superior part of the wound with a bandage, and make an incision in one, two, or three places along the vein, and raise the black blood clot using the upper part of the leg above the wound, until all the quantity desired is extracted, as much as necessary, and which the patient can endure.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it tightly, and order the patient to abstain from cold foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May the elevation of their legs be done in this manner: you who raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with warm water until the swelling goes down and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised by a strong exertion, then bathe it as soon as possible while the member is still warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then open the vein at the right place, either along its length or at the very end, or at the lowest part of it, and remove the blood.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then cut the vein with scissors and remove it from all parts until it disappears, and you must observe the color of it; if it declines to blackness, that is a sign of grave illness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, after you have removed the vein and the blood, examine that white part to see if there is any hardness.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert your fingers into the space so that it is raised and freed from the tie, and suspend those with hot clay or lion's dung.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another incision, perpendicular to the first, and carefully cut the tie away from the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that one and incise it in the rear section, after the leg, extract it and raise it until it comes out through the second incision, and extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section of all the incisions, ensuring that all are drained, and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you fail to extract and raise it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle into the space and draw it out, or insert your fingers into the space and turn your hand over until it is freed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes back to the patient through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once everything has been removed, apply to the affected area a mixture of vinegar and rose oil and unmixed oil, and treat that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting in which it is wrapped, and not straight according to what we have said, then you must cut into that part of its entire tortuosity and at the places where it wraps itself, and with a stitch raise that whole thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult to raise that; and use your discretion in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of the wound:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as sharp as with wounds, nor does it have an acute extremity so as not to damage the vein; and it has a thick flexibility, because if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; it has a superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the hernia on Arabic land and in the hot, dry lands of India with little greenery or openness.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very few are generated in other parts of the body, other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of putrefaction occurs when cold humors infiltrate the body, bringing serpents and worms and parasites that are born between the feces and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending arrival of gout is this: what happens in the leg is a violent inflammation; then the place becomes sore; and soon the vein begins to leave the area of that soreness, which seems torn from the plant itself.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the gouty inflammation appears, you will see that it envelops a part of the leg like a piece of lead from which a dragon's weight would hang. Within this dragon, there is a space, and you should notice and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And on many occasions, when you encounter some unknown cause of this pain outside the body, you should envelop it in lead and note that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the movement persists, you cut a part of it and wrap the wound; do not incise the deep one until it is completely detached, for if you do, it will contract and penetrate into the flesh, causing abscesses, gangrene in the area, and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	As the treatment progresses and it is extracted little by little, make sure that it completely comes out from behind (the affected area) and do not leave any cause of it remaining in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men are affected in its length reaching up to their wrists and even beyond; it has also been observed that I have seen one case where it extended for 10 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during treatment, insert the ray into the channel of the vein and pierce that long channel in the flesh, so that all that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; then take care of it for the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is sometimes seen with great swelling, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes much painful sensation, and is derived from every painful point.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and refer to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine itching.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is called bovine itching in many lands, because it causes great distress to the animal; it is caused by a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and it affects all over the body, pushing and weakening (the muscles and tissue), and its manifestation appears first in the withdrawal of the limbs until it ruptures the skin and lets out the worm.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms is due to the corruption of certain humors, which cause worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by the evil of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the eyes, severely affecting them and even destroying them, which should be prevented.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, you must not do so unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what remains below it with strong compression, and afterwards dry it and extract that which is inside it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not disturb you, then place a hot cautery over the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which also corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it affects the eyes or their vicinity, then tighten the upper eyelid with strong pressure, dry it and extract that which is inside; and know that this malady uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate corrupt, bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On cutting away from the disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that appears in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I recommended.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to attend a female patient in a village, and upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which had been broken for an hour. As it was healing, you noticed that the inflammation moved from one place to another, appearing almost like living silver as it spread from one location to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he removed the pain from that place and applied pressure to the muscle, holding it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct in the other body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I found myself turning over the body, examining it entirely as I had seen; and I was too amazed by the permutation of the illness and by the speed with which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, however, I have seen many which cause severe pain to be changed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	You do not see this in the feet of women as well.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is for any other reason than because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this condition, the sensation of that changed wind appears.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retrospective cure not be apparent in those who are weak and have a moist body with veins close to the surface.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you wish to cure the patient and they feel that pain, then it is not apparent as we have said, but you should strengthen over that area and gently pull it, and let it rest, and apply heat to that place until that airiness is reduced, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not find them in your heels, then cure that by relieving the body and what expels airiness, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of serpent and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body they pierce, for their diversity lies in that some have large tips, and small ones, and concave, and dull points, all of which are solid; and others have three angles, and others tongues, and still others barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it is divided into two manners: for the principal members, as the head, heart, liver, lungs, entrails, hernias, and bladder, are affected similarly; so when it catches any of these members and signals your death, which I will describe later, you must be aware to avoid extraction of that arrow from those parts where death is that which prevails in the most favorable conditions, and when these symptoms do not appear on you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it and heal the disease.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the disease, it is when the arrow strikes in it and penetrates the bone, and a puff emerges from the cyphac (the part above the brain), due to the violent heat, causing scotoma (darkness in the field of vision), vertigo, pain in the legs, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion of speech, and vomiting of bile. When this is severe, word is cut off and voice is destroyed. From the affected area, a white humid discharge resembling powder emerges, and it feels like flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the arrow enters the heart, so that it is close to the left nipple, and you feel a hard cause of pain, not visible; if the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the flow of black plague blood, and there is coldness in the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; then know that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung, appear as pus from the plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are inflamed, and there is a change in the patient's complexion, and they breathe heavily, and ask for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the tendon in the leg, and the pain is close to the small ribs, it causes great pain with violent sobs, and all the muscle members are not completely relaxed.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then strong vomiting occurs from the undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the organs, or tissue, or hernia, and there is no hope for its cure unless the arrow is removed.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine leaks out, it causes pain from some internal cause, and intense pain is felt by the patient; then you will know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, head, shoulders, elbows, back bones, hip joint, and legs, can also be saved according to proper disposition when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And now I will relate to you what I have observed about these arrows, so that you may understand their use in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal gland of a man in the root of his nose and it is extracted from him in another place, leaving the bones of his eyebrow intact, he recovers and there is no further damage to his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the bones of his nose, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was concealed and could only be retrieved with a small extremity to which it adhered, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without leaving an auricle.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, without any further damage to his nose.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And then extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been hit in the groin, which was an Arab arrow, and it is that one with feathers; and then I incise it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the patient's groin; and then I gently remove it, and thus the Christian is healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I also extracted another arrow from a man who had been hit in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; so, after we had passed thirty days and nothing changed about his conditions, I incise the arrow and carefully removed it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had struck his back and the wound was deeply embedded; after applying fire nearby for some time, I pulled out the arrow at the base of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly, and the wound was deeply embedded within, and it did not change in appearance for a long time, and the woman did not suffer much in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man with an arrow in his face, the wound is deep and the arrow breaks, causing little pain but much similarity to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And they removed the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was wounded in the middle part of his nose and had already inclined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called upon for the cure, so close the wound of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you should examine the wound of the arrow very closely; then you should inquire about that attempt subtly, and not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain leaving the right ear, and then hoped that this pain was due to the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And you applied the place with a plaster that is attractive and digestive, trusting that it would heal the location where the arrow was wounded, so that it would dry up over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not make any incision at the site of the accident that the arrow has reached; continue to apply poultice over it for several days and no accidents occur; as the wound consolidates, break up the pain from the extraction of the arrow in intervals of several days until one day you feel the arrow within its base and I reconnect it there.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should pause over the wound with acute corrosive medicine for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently try to remove it, and cut back the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I spend time on it for intervals of time over four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then you should press that the wound becomes enlarged, and I attempt to insert scissors into it, and hold them, and do not be concerned about appearance. You will no longer need to subtilize and ingeniously devise methods on that account until one day through these ingenious methods, you manage to pull it out using forceps meticulously crafted, as the form of those will come at the end of this chapter, until I extract it; and then you should restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage would not be restored, and they have restored it so that the disease is consolidated, and health is achieved throughout the body, and there will be no relapse in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that it maintains this rule and meaning regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those others are not understood from the narrative nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans speak little about what is present and much about what is absent; and from what is presented, they infer what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or on the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is a dart proceeding in fleshy places, and is thrown out and voided.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when cats are eaten, then know that you leave it for a few days so that the flesh around it decays and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to its prescribed eating timing, leave it for a few days, and on another day, repeat the process of discharge, and it will be voided out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your prescribed eating every few days, then know that you must pierce the path of the dart in that bone, gradually widening the area where the dart is located, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the skull bone and has pierced one of the brain's cavities, causing some of those symptoms you described, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it there for some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the brain, and after some days the patient recovers from those symptoms without any other cause related to them, then devise a way to attract the arrow and remove it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not allow for its removal, then apply treatments around the arrow's path as we have recommended, and take care of the spot until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the body and is affecting a vital area, then examine that attempt, and if you feel any pain, use some suitable tools to attract and remove it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you must work on the plague until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are ears attached that are stuck, then you must carefully cut away the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides using every possible tool; and devise a plan to remove the meat from the fracture of the ears and their twisting until it becomes easier.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, then use your hand with forceps at all times to make it give way; and act with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and can be easily removed along with it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach that of your own accord, then wait for a few days until the parts that are in the path of the arrow can be moved, and then repeat the attempt when the pain has subsided.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If a cold or fever disrupts your flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe your skill in cutting veins or nerves, or strings, and use all means at your disposal to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and calmness and delay and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by your physician.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady aligns with the figure according to which you must aim the tip of the arrow, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your ability, then administer what you can do according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Also, the arrows that are shot in opposition to another party, or which have already pierced any part of the exterior parties, or make the end of the arrow thin by virtue of the force applied beyond the designated cord, then you must focus on it; and cut it according to the quantity in which the pincers grasp it; and then shoot it, for it is made light with regard to penetration.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then you cut with a knife according to the direction of the arrow that penetrates into the bone, amplifying the cut and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not heal within a few days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the point of the arrow is in that place, then push it towards the opening.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point has fallen and you want to give impulsion, then insert a fine instrument and, if it is blunt, strike it firmly into the cavity of the bone at the base of the arrow and push it towards the opening.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it strongly towards the instrument, as the arrow is displaced by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is embedded deeply, you must press into all the flesh in which it is lodged, as much as you can, and then treat the wound as best suits the case.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close to a sensitive area that you can touch, and it is possible for you to remove it without causing damage to blood vessels or nerves, then remove it and treat the wound as needed, and bind it if the injury is deep, and care for it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Design of forceps used for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a serrated edge to grasp the arrow firmly so that it does not slip loose.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And they are made in various shapes and sizes, coarse and fine, according to the thickness of the arrow and its fragility, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the area affected.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of driving out the concavity of this extremity with pressure, thus alleviating the intrusion of the arrow into it, and pushing away that pain.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of driving out the stiff extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus with pressure, so that the intrusion of it into the concave arrow is alleviated and it is driven away from that place.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy from which it is customary to draw blood, are two pulsating veins located near the ears, called the temporal arteries; two veins appearing on both temples; and two veins in the lower eyelid of each eye, called the lacrimal veins; a vein located in the middle part of the forehead, and one in the tip of the nose; two veins at the nape of the neck; and two veins on the lower lip; and two veins on the upper lip; these are called the jugular veins. And there are also two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, of which one is cephalic and requires wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and also "the sordid vein," and it is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another from the cephalic; and the people name that the "vein of the whole body," the basilica is the vein which is located in the axilla and is called "citular"; and the common people call them "the abdominal vein"; and the funis of the arm, which is situated over the fossa, is the one where flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the skin through manifest indication; and salvatella, this is the vein located between the aforementioned auricular and the smaller one below, and it is double.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the inner side of the wild lettuce; the second is superficial, and its location is left of the domestic leg bandage; and the sciatic vein, whose location is left of the wild lettuce bandage; and in the bandage there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is ancient therapy for inflammation, migration, and healing of old sores and ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the method of bleeding should be as follows: it is best to cut the scalp of the patient directly above the veins, and rub the scalp of the patient on both sides at the location where the veins are close to the skin, using ample friction; tighten the bandage around the patient's head so that both locations appear to have the auricles in two distinct parts from the rest of the head; if you wish to follow this method, and if you feel the pulse of the blood flow as described above, then proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Next, take the sharp scalpel and insert it into the vein in the neck until the flailotomy (a procedure to stop bleeding by severing a blood vessel) reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then, raise your hand over the vein and neck, and make an incision in the vein with the sharp wound.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers around it, and make the cut as deep as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply strong poultices and leave them until the wound is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And as for the beginning of this book, it describes the incision of those parts and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are located near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflowing of fluids in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing a fleubotomy on those parts depends on what you have been taught: compress the patient's neck until the two veins appear by direct observation and are clearly demonstrated, and then carefully proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, raise the chain over the vein at the indicated point above, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument beneath it, and elevate the vein; cut it likewise as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need's quantity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then, apply pressure to the patient's compression, rest the indicated point on the vein for an hour, and apply warmth and strength to that area until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now follows the recall of their memories, and from those, incision, and attraction at the commencement of relief.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient ailments of the face and to migraines, fevers, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy on the patient depends on what you have learned; so, the disease tightens its collar with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "sower" whose shape it is.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the puncture at the prominent point of the sower over that vein and strike it with a lean or other tool in the manner of its use, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's illness and tighten it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, the vein is opened with a wide flebotomy, but it is not appropriate for acute flebotomies as with other flebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and the vein is flebotomized according to its transversality, because the bone is very close and strong, and it would break in a delicate flebotomy.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the youth of the two veins that are the tears of both eyes due to irritation of the eye by sand and sebaceous matter in the eyes, and to illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the flebotomy is that the disease tightens the collar around it, then you make a flebotomy on those parts, and you stand over the head of him.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the flebotomy is made according to the transverse direction along a little flebotomy, for in the place there is no flesh; and if the flebotomy is subtle, then only a little of its end is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then make the incision of the hernia as much as necessary, and apply pressure on that side, and tighten it for a night, then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The flebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and violent thirst, and for facial ailments, migraines, and redness that occur on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this flebotomy is that the disease tightens its collar, and you take hold of its nose with your left hand, take a long subtle flebotomy, placing it in the middle part of the nose according to straightness; for the vein does not appear sensitive here, and soon the hernia begins to flow.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure that you complete the fistula operation slowly with your hand and let the blood flow according to need; then close it up gradually for a night, as it is restored more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The healing of the fistula from both operations should be facilitated by restricting alcohol and beginning leprosy treatment, as well as addressing other maladies, acute or chronic, and corrosive ulcerations with potent remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the fistula in those cases is that the disease tightens them all in their place with adhesion; and the surgeon should be on top of the patient's head, and the patient should lie on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make a small fistula in the vein of the thigh with a wide fistula; and then drain the blood slowly according to the season or as much as necessary for that purpose; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then apply a bandage, tighten the two veins with moderate compression to prevent the disease from spreading, and leave it within the bandage until the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And also regarding the jugular vein phlebotomy, it is useful for small apths and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers in the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for these is that it stops the disease in front of you, tightens the neck with a bandage, and then turns back the lips and looks at both veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication for each is due to the darkness of both, and this is because there are small veins in their vicinity; and therefore you cut each one with a sharp knife.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt left, and you do not know which one it is, then enter into incision of the greatest among them, and from the most manifest pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it seem like the two veins that are on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	You may often cut the two veins that are on the lip, left.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If both veins that are on the tongue are left, then perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximities that are in the throat, to the malady of the uvula, and to maladies of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is to follow the disease among your fingers before the sun, and elevate the tongue, and observe beneath the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make incisions on each one; and be careful not to cut off the arteries with your knife, as they are still pulsating.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are fleubotomized in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men. The fleubotomy of them is made in two ways: either by applying a heated instrument or gently declining; or by using a cutaneous fleubotomy, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for section, and it has special cuts of various thicknesses according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle fleubotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both the thickness of it should be such as to open the concave veins that are full, proceeding apparently thickly, and towards those that contain thick clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive-tree flébotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flébotomy is of lesser extent and more delicate extremity, and it is suitable for the flébotomy of fine veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the young of the flébotomy of the basil vein, which is one of three veins: here you extract the blood from the malady that remains in the gullet and colon, and from this, the leg and belly are drained.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flébotomist, when performing that flébotomy, to guard well over that area and be very careful in that area, because if he leaves an artery there or makes a mistake in the puncture of the flébotomy, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is important that he does not perform that flébotomy with a sharp tool, but rather with a secant.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the stone does not appear through a clear indication, you must leave that one and move to another, or seek some help; or cut into the flesh in place of the stone at the end of the arm, since it is manifest; and then cut out the stone as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, first identify the tightness in the arm and locate the spot between the wrists, then apply pressure over it; bend the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision as we have said; be careful not to touch the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, with pressure, an inflation in the spot that you have marked with your hand, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the blood flow in the flebotomy as with an ear of corn, and the flow is delicate, then know that it is from the artery's flow; then tie and stop the thread over a long space; and close the thread, and if the clot is severed, since the veins are severed, tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient from the moisture of their body, be extremely careful with them and do not harm them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the gangrenes do not separate and you are not immediately present with medicine for it, then you will need to incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of the limb is contracted and the gangrene is separated; or you take a piece of cloth, make a tie from it, tighten it around the location of the vein with stricture, and apply pressure within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the gangrene is separated, then it is good; and if not, treat that with the water as mentioned before in the recall of the location of the powdered gangrene's flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the gangrene from them is difficult due to their disposition and the location of the plague, as well as the possibility of ligament in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and leaving it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be wary of the phlebotomist who is overzealous in performing phlebotomy, for there is a nerve involved; and then, upon finding the nerve, the phlebotomist will experience stupor, making healing difficult, and strong individuals may not recover fully. This nerve causes sensations; if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not evident, you must pause and consider the phlebotomy with which you are about to cut and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief from ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want to perform a phlebotomy using a olive or myrrh phlebotomizer, it is because the blood is safe from all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to remember that in performing the phlebotomy, you should not puncture the head of the lizard too deeply, seek the most accessible location, and do not notice it if it feels sore, especially on your first attempt at phlebotomy, as it may be troubled by the initial percussion.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, if the inflammation does not subside even after the first phlebotomy, do not pay attention to that sign of inflammation.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy and its complications are also factors to consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translates to: "The first [point] is that you must know that amputation of a limb is not carried out except in the interest of health and with the hope of saving a patient, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the thigh, namely: the cephalic, femoral, or basilic; it is carried out at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and during winter, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And amputation should be performed on the third day or the first poust (after midnight) following the onset of pain.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Amputation may be performed at any time of day or night, whenever it is convenient and necessary, whether during the day or in the evening.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And note that children should not undergo amputation until they are at least 13 years old, women who are pregnant should not be amputated unless it is necessary after the fourth month of pregnancy, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not undergo amputation.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be flebotomized in any way, it is advisable that he purify his veins with a lion's clister, if there is a wide fissure retained, so that the veins do not throw off the superfluity during the flebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not be flebotomized if they are naive, ignorant, or excessive in eating and drinking, nor should they avoid illness or madness until this is remedied, nor ill health from hydrops, and it is better to delay flebotomy unless there is a passing colic, vomiting, pain in the abdomen, multiplied thigh, leg, or body work, or exercise during meals or vigils, or any cause that weakens strength, either in the human or animal body.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is advisable to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard if the swelling is due to heavy food and drink, or medicines if it is possible for them to contribute to it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse yourself in a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or if exercised for some activity so that the inflammation is reduced.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at about the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that foot, which should be watched on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is anger, fear, or any physical misfortune, and when there is excessive work and pain, similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bedside, let the causes be present of which the usual corroding and destructive habits of men are composed, odorous and balmy, and similar to those according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist over another cushion that is pus, rather than the one of the patient who was to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and rub it with your hand using the flebotomator two or three times; and tighten the ligament with a belt and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And whether the constriction is temperate, where the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is excessive, then prohibit the flow of the blood; or it is for softening, and then prohibit the movement of the blood entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the constriction, ensuring that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are inflated and visible to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the flebotomist should apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy, place their left hand's finger on the vein, slightly moving it away from where the flebotomy is desired, so that the vein bulges slightly and the percussion is lessened; for veins are often found to be full of air when the flebotomy is performed on them, and they contract when the flebotomy is applied, and the flebotomist should withdraw their finger; if the flebotomy breaches the vein, it will become constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the fleubotomator (bloodletter) be prepared and ready for all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, after the fleubotomi (bloodletting), if the vein is swollen at once, it is good; but if not, repeat this another time, moving to a different spot, or apply pressure with a compress, if the location is not tender.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is tender or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limbs, as this will cause severe tenderness, nor should you immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the fleubotomi if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if you observe a small and subtle opening, and fear that the amount (of blood) will not increase as desired, then repeat the fleubotomi at that spot according to rectitude, and adjust the compression slightly, applying pressure before the location becomes tender, because in many people, slight compression is sufficient.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may be that the already-formed appendage does not interest you, as it is not due to any cause, and apply some oil from any part of the fissure, as it soothes the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil in all fleubotomy, by which venesectioners remove veins to prevent body pain, is a very ancient and wise practice when one of those is placed over the location, because the pain withdraws and rotates when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a great abscess is formed in the location of fleubotomy, as it often happens, especially to those who have not bled much but only bleeding has occurred, or at the sight of a few veins, then you cut, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the spot, slightly heated, and tighten it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then he should close this by filling it with the blood from that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not notice it; and if you wish, apply to that place some mixture of aloe and myrrh, or some kind of mint juice or warming agent similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And sometimes accidents happen, requiring the removal of abscesses and prominences through phlebotomy in the basilic.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so place your hand over it, and if you feel hardness, your compression should be on that part, for then the prominence is a sign of ill health; and therefore be careful to apply yourself to any cause of this that we have mentioned, for strong blood flow will come from the sanatory artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an embrocation on the place where there is stiffness, so that the part will be enduring, and take care of the other remedies as they are being applied until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the pus from everyone entirely according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color appearing on the wound.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the wound is black, leave it to drain until it becomes pus; similarly, if it appears thick, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of one who is full and strong, and needs immediate extraction of pus from a wound: amplify the incision of the vein and make the flebotomies wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, do the opposite: extract the pus in multiple stages, and make the incision tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best approach for venipuncture is the transverse section, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And in this manner of phlebotomy, it is free from the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and more safe than phlebotomy according to latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, and know that you should cure that before phlebotomy with a little wine infused in milky or plain oxymel, and draw out the blood from him in three or four draws.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold of congestion, then take before phlebotomy wine infused in myrrh or in honey-water aromated with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in aromatic water highly perfumed.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by the sudden loss of much blood, then know that you should take in small sips of water with some fragrant wine; and use aromatics such as galangal, and apply a cold compress to their feet or to the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the gangrened part a second time, choosing from it the place for flebotomy as the main evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the small gangrene little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If one wishes to extend their arm and remove the gangrene a second time, and their body is strong, then do this approximately seven or eight hours after the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	One who wishes to throw the gangrene from their body in the opposite direction of the decline it has taken, should do so on the second or third day after it was first extended.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	As for the body in which there is much gangrene that has already formed a crust and is acute and causes fever, it should be evacuated all at once, and a large amount of pus should be removed, and the sight of the wound should be enlarged, so that syncope does not occur, because you will have preserved all the conditions for flebotomy; and you should place your hand on the gangrene's pulse to prevent death from syncope, as frequent repetitions are necessary when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifices of the vein have already been closed and it has become difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it outwardly, for this is too painful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habitize the layssa (wound) as it is a flebotomism secondarily; or remove this with the acute-ness of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place your hand over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sage, and make light compression until the blood has completely drained out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is infected, wound it (the area) and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him at that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the brachial or basilic, when they are not found or are obscured, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient inserts their hand into the water, causing the wound to clot and the vein to appear clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and perform the phlebotomy by making a small transversal cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the incision should be wide, and your phlebotomy should be such that you perform it on the joint of the hand with a small cut.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then insert your hand into the water again and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the journey of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sun is most relaxed in cold water at that time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the flap of this vein is much safer than that of all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nervous elements.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is indicated for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you should tighten your hand strongly or hold it firmly, as you have placed it in cold water, so that the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible to the eye; then perform a transverse incision on that vein; and if you make an incision completely, it will not bleed again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to cut off your hand during the phlebotomy, because it contains the nerves of the digit naked of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the san (blood) flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And after the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand on the vein gently and use oil and salt, so that it is not hardened excessively; and be careful that you do this in a narrow space.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the care after the flebotomy of this with the left hand, is applicable to the diseases of the chest.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the flebotomy of the other, as you have done in this one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the care after the vena saphena flebotomy is for diseases that are at the edges of the body, as well as for diseases of the mother, and to retain menstruation, and for maladies of the veins and ulcers of limbs and old bands, and similar to the diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the foot surgery is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction until the veins appear; it is tied over the joint of the foot with a strap; the location of the vein becomes visible after this, and from there it branches out across the surface of the foot in numerous directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, make the incision wide enough to remove the hernia through the opening in the thigh, as this is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a foot surgery on the surface of the foot, be careful to avoid the nerves that are left there over the surface of the foot, and position your incision carefully so as not to cut into them while performing the surgery across.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And the surgery should be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to elevate the foot, then immerse it in water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist misses on the first attempt, he should repeat the phlebotomy on another part, since the place is clean; and do not fear any ill effects, but be careful with the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems to do the same thing on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for sciatic vein, the place as we have said is the sole, where the calf muscle joins the tibia, a point known as the 'wild departure'.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the incision of phlebotomy on him is at hip pain when it is for a severe condition.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that it lets the patient's illness enter a bath, quickly and intensely relaxing his body from the wide surface of his foot down to four sides with a thin, long band, so that only this appears.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, you perform a bloodletting on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the direction, which is best; either puncture it with an incision or cut it off through secction, since the location of it is accessible.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in most people quite painful; and if you find it, not showing any sensation at all, perform a bloodletting on some of its branches, and this is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the big toe or the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the pressure and place your hand over the site of the bloodletting gently, as rest is essential for healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Vents are of corns, or of iron, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is performed in two ways: one involves lancing and draining the pus, and the other is through ventilating the wound by lancing it.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation, which is through lancing, is performed in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are performed by lancing and draining pus are in twelve places of the body, of which one is the place where ventilations are paused, and it is the last opening at the top of the head; another opening on each side of the neck; ventilations under the jaw, leaving the mandible below the mouth; ventilations in two places on the shoulder blades; ventilations in the loins, over the end of the coccyx; ventilations in two hollows, at a distance of two arms' length; ventilations through two pins; and ventilations through two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of the wind should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus does not catch the virtue through them, as it is done in phlebotomy; nor should one cover that a wind is done with fire or use fire in any illness caused by congestion until the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to provoke wind for an illness or continuously, we should begin at the onset of the month and its end, in the middle part of the day and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men where wind is multiplied, it becomes difficult to extract the wind by means of phlebotomy and finds grave severity and hardness; and from these men, congestion and heat are found on their face and head, and in their eyes; and they experience pressure on their face and forehead, darkness and heaviness in their feet; and some lose the place where the wind is located; and from these, their laughter increases; and some taste wind in their mouths or their tongues swell up and spit out wind; and from these, sleep increases, and others suffer from heat and itching and various plagues during sleep.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when pain appears for any cause among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then ventilation should be performed immediately rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate relief from ventilation of the neck is that when it relieves pressure on the head and what sinks into the pits, it is more effective than anything else for clearing out all parts of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy in the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of bad quality or has catarrh, as it causes great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, one should not use those instruments, and on the heads of which severe illnesses are present.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is lying on his back feel no pain; and for this reason, you must command the nurse to place her hand slightly on the suction cups at the points left open, lest there be generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The use of cupping (ventozacio) from alkahol is in place of phlebotomy of the deep vein and basilic: and thereby it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the alveoli and the cutting of the air tool, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the alkahol cupping be slightly pressed, for if it is left paused, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the cupping from alhagdahan confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, and pre-focal pain, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And beware that you command the fan to not press his hand during the incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The ventilation of the mind is facilitated by alcohol in the mouth, and it helps to heal gingival corruption and resembles the conditions of oral diseases that occur in both lips, serving as an alternative to phlebotomy.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	However, the ventilation that is performed on both palm spaces provides relief through repleting warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two spaces within the fossae provides immediate relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, as those attract the blood from all the smaller veins in the flesh, as well as the thinner veins of the other larger veins, to achieve attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bellows to not blow too forcefully during incision, for the place is already devoid of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows that is blown over others and applies wind to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to pus ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the bellows to be a strong one, and of iron, for the place needs deep incision; and its strong blows cut through subtle incisions made with the scalpel.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The bellows from the legs should be reduced in size gradually, for they draw blood from throughout the body, alleviating old pain in the joints and kidneys, and the bladder; they provoke menstruation and relieve breathlessness and coughing; and they serve as a substitute for laminectomy, and for hangman's noose, and two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these humors weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the armpits to the groin, the rejuvenation is also proper for the armpit vents of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the vents is that it stops the ventilation at the beginning of the view and sucks by a timely suction, and does not prolong the position of the vents, but rather lightly, and tightly those considered necessary, and allows the humors to come to the location by chance.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location turn red and swell, and the pain of the sore appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you cut and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender skin, be careful to scarify him once and not too deeply, so the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to amplify the scarification and make it slightly deeper, and then apply suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein is great, be careful to scarify twice, for the first scar opens the way for subtilization of the vein and its liquidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make a third scarification to achieve its final result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we want to extract the vein little by little or in small pieces, a single scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deep enough.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the cut is deep, hard, and narrow, and its edges are rough, then the areas for the suction cups should be moistened, opened, and smoothed; if it is in summer, use olive oil, or violet oil, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil of mullein; and if it is in winter, use horse oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or saint john's wort oil, similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, dense, then use amber oil, or balsam oil, or olive oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions or with water heated by solar energy, or with water from a couch (a type of bath), or with Bordeaux wine, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose leech has a lot of humidity, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac berries, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are thick, wash their leeches in old wine or water infused with fennel, which is greater (maybe referring to strength), or from anise seed decoction, or chamomile, and similar preparations.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be careful that the leeching is not done in a bath; it should be administered immediately after the bath for about an hour or two, and the leech should rest near the affected area.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before ventilation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment, if the phlebotomist or the one who has undergone phlebotomy is irritable and their blood is hot and inflamed, then you must take into account causes of coldness, such as with milky pus, swelling, vinegar, salt water, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And restrict their diet with foods like chicken, lean meats, spices, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is fierce, they must take in drinking warm almond milk, or milk made from the seeds of cannabis, sumac, and a mixture of fragrant herbs between wine and honey; and it is recommended that they limit their intake of alcohol and food, abstain from foods like chicken, lamb, fish, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on days of vomiting and incision, drinking should be greater than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is also necessary to give some men, in certain hours, a small amount of tyriac, or muscle medicine, which is muscated, or alcelite before vomiting or incision, or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is relieved; and they should not take that burning.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, the vents that are a form of lancing should be vents that are paused over the liver, and on the stomach, and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not suffer lancing over themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those who treat only the pain of a member, but rather attract the pus of a wound from the flux of the disease of the nose; and they use that for the ventosa to be paused over the breast in the malautia (malady) of the flow of pus from the member, as well as over the stomach and navel; because it rarifies the member, rubs it, and removes the pain as it resolves the ventosa.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the hemorrhoids when they occur in their sitting or lying position, for by virtue of strong attraction, their hemorrhoidal position and pox are eradicated from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to be placed on the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only, and other times they are administered over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of heated water in the patient's gallbladder ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation is filled and a great pus forms, it is water alone or water in which suitable herbs are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of an ampoule administered by fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid, the size of a palm; and in its length, in the place that is on the circumference, half of it, the hole should be small according to the quantity that can enter it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use ery or citrus, with thick margins, lion, eagle, and turtle shells to prevent them from damaging the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a transverse strip of ery or iron, where the candle is held over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ampoule is much larger than the one we have previously used, and its quantity is less depending on the illness and the state of the patient using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the strength of the suction cups on children and the weak is different from the suction cups on young people and robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of stopping this suction cup is to apply a small amount of hot wax from a fire over it, and place another one in the middle of the transverse tongue at the exact spot of the suction cup, so that the flame is lit around the edge without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Once the suction cup is removed from the patient's member, place a cloth over the mentioned area, and while we have the cups, do not remove them immediately but let the heat from the flame on that cloth gradually dissolve the suction cup.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And keep applying the heat according to your preference, repeating as needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	It is also possible to use a suction cup on patients with pleurisy, filled with water instead of air, without a transverse tongue or a tract, and it should only be placed over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this windbag, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	**Chapter LXXVII**
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in most members but in those members where it is impossible to place ventosas due to their smallness, as well as the nose and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, as mentioned for the nose and others.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments in the infected waters of putrid sores.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is better to lay them down during the day and night in putrid water until they are painless, and not cause any cause in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleubotomia and ventosas; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and let them rest upon it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and secured.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to remove the buildup from the affected area with a wind, it is more beneficial in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the area with vinegar and then apply plenty of hot water; it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the fever lasts a long time and the perspiration is excessive, then you should immerse a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the sweating stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the fever has spread, then sprinkle on it dried vitriol or something similar to stiptic agents, as long as the fever is drained; or apply over the area powdered roasted beans, and leave them until the beans adhere to the affected area, and the fever drains.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, apply bloodletting, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited, then the place should be rubbed with a recent wound or left with a needle in the area until it bleeds; and when they are stopped, for those who feel any pain soon afterwards, it will subside.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop bleeding, sprinkle some alum, salt, or ash onto it and press immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of recovery from the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is prompted frequently in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it happens that this manner of knowledge in our land is private; and you should never forget it at any time; and I have not devoted myself to it later on, but through the length of reading books from the Ancients and studying to understand them, until I extracted their science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have dedicated myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already in this chapter described everything that relates to my knowledge and on which I have gained experience; so that others may be spared the trouble of lengthy exposition; I have abridged it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it in the conclusion of declaration; and I have formed in it brief forms of the tools that are administered for treatment, as is done through addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The sum and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those which must be mentioned beforehand, before we begin the remembrance of the broken limbs and their various conditions.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which, at the beginning, the craftsmen are forced and obliged to dwell upon the truth of those; it is for you and for those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said, when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or misalignment, you must realize at the outset that you should begin with bloodletting or removal of that part, or in some instances, if no other cause prohibits, with the use of virtues, or it may be as it presents itself, or weak from decrepitude, or subject to violent heat, or intense friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then, he should be content with his own diet of sharp herbs and lean meats and crabs; and refrain from thick meats and any foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as you are careful to avoid apoplexy, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original condition, according to which they were usually treated from the beginning.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the broken bone begins to be healed, it is necessary to abstain from foods that are too rich in nourishment, both in quantity and quality, such as foods with viscosity, prepared from wheat cooked with water, rice, beans, meat, veal, fresh fish, large quantities of wine and similar foods, and follow this regimen for the coagulization of the fracture more lightly and gently.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones become brittle when they are in old age or decrepitude, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature due to the dehydration of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continue according to their nature as long as there is dehydration of those limbs, and they continue to be consolidated and strengthened in the end of old age, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause resembling gout in which there is swelling that adheres and strengthens that part, until it becomes solid and firm, as with fire at the beginning, whenever any cause does not prevent it from performing its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, foods that have weight and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fractures varies according to the diversity of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of a bone in the leg is different from the fracture of a bone in the head; and the fracture of a bone in the foot is distinct from the fracture of a bone in the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now, I shall endeavor to translate your medieval medical text line by line:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures requires different treatments.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diverse species of bone fractures in their innards; for some are curved fractures or those that occur in them as stars; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: such as stag and rib fractures, and additions proceeding and not proceeding, as is done in surgery when it is prepared to write, and fracture by plague and disruption on the head, and small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own method or torment for restoration, according to the recollection of its distinct place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how bone fracture is known: the deformity of it, and that prominence and appreciation upon touch, and only from it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent deformity in the location nor is any severe pain felt when touching the bone due to its movement and the illness does not cause great suffering, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may be either a deformity or a small fracture, where you feel pain in your hand and compression throughout; place it under the remedies that you remember are appropriate for this location at this time; and make it very tight due to subtle tightness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the location, when it is curved and does not split into two or anything else other than what naturally occurs in it, if the entire part of its comparison is disrupted, then you must begin with your hour to correct the curvature that has occurred in it with caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has occurred as an apostemic cauterization, then leave it for a few days until the aposteme disappears; and use similar techniques of elevation and device that you can according to your ability.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and sewing of the intestine is more delicate than the repair of the bone where the rupture occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second, as the memory of it comes.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If there are fractures in the bone that are severe, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, either with the hand or the foot; or use a cushion if the member is small; or apply two bands or one band and a pad.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position the member as it was naturally placed, while the fractures of the broken member are extended, then pierce to cause them to return to their proper place using tools and in any way possible in those locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful, according to your strength, not to harm the patient during your operation or cause any injury; and pierce as best you can, applying one bone to another in its most suitable way.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure that at this opportune moment you apply your hand to it, and if any different cause arises, correct that one and suppress that one by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause gangrene by such cauterization due to their operations, or they cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen through the operations of their moted (presumedly "motas" - instruments) attempts.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then attach, apply, and carefully operate on and tighten that member, and provide rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him/her avoid any twisting of that part in the hours of their vigils and sleep, and observe his/her revolts and agitations, and must oversee his/her activities, and must attend to all his/her movements with all your virtue; and wait for the position of the member to be one where the pain is alleviated, which is because when it is in a disposition causing pain or injury, you then change its position to one where it does not feel pain; and take care that the placement of it remains straight and even so that no deformity occurs in the member as it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the limb at rest is what you should observe, for you must know that the limbs can be diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of these.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, like the arm and its elbow and similar to these, you should know that the wrapping should be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thick like the skin or the leg, you should know that their wrapping should be loose and hard, as the tightness around each part connects the large member and strengthens it from all sides, so nothing gets in between.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, and with your evacuation of the equation, place a suitable pause on it, over the location of that fracture with three or four wraps, depending on the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the wrap.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then carefully remove that from the upper part of the fracture site, and tighten gently so as not to affect your stricture which you have strengthened at the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually lengthen the wrap around the fracture site, and gently loosen the tightness little by little, until you take away from the location a great part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fractured site, over the previous wrap; and now inspect the wraps at the part farthest from the fracture; and your operation on the tightness of the wrap and its mollification as per what we have said about the first wrap.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the wraps a leather or cloth bandage which corresponds to the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature; otherwise, do not place anything on it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand over the other part, and cover these neatly arranged sterile bandages over it, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and apply pressure where the abscess is and where there is inflammation; leave that for a few days; and then tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of various types of canvas, carefully made; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, take care that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than the others; and the length of the bandage according to how it is measured on the member in terms of size and narrowness; then tighten the bandages over the other part as per your initial structure; wrap them closely from above down, following the stricture we mentioned regarding the position of the fracture; and the stricter it should be, the longer the distance from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are stronger in thickness and fineness, and abundant; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in the operation of some stiff sheets, the threads of their strings twist, and it is a great error when tightness is equated with equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Likewise, very fine threads are not convenient, for you cannot achieve the desired tightness with them, and it does not ensure that there is less than a finger width between one thread and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the hernia is located near the ends of the tendons, tighten it in those places without using iron or twisted wool thread, until it does not cause any damage.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes, the pain is so severe that it becomes a plague, causing disruptions in the spine, and one remembers it as mentioned in the second chapter, according to its peculiarities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately tied to the splint; this is because, when the limb is large, it cannot be properly supported by the splint unless it is waited for several days, or even a week or more, depending on your confidence in preventing an abscess from forming.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting as a quick means of restoring a fracture, particularly suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, since it does not apply heat or friction: take powdered flour, which is the heart of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that is not possible, then use an alternative method by applying a thin and not too dense composition; and then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe in dragon's tears; or mix it with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's condition permits; and apply this plaster, as it is of good composition and slightly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plastering method that provides relief for fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of migrain and other herbs, such as white yarrow, dragon's blood, mirra, aloe, acacia, and Armenian honey, in varying quantities.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these preparations should be crushed in a mortar to a fine consistency, mixed with water or egg albumen and administered as needed.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of plastering joints and bones to their locations, and as a result, pain occurs in those and cracks and fractures; take fine linen cloth, submerge it in hot vinegar and oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster, however, is not beneficial for restoration, it prevents abscesses and specifically expels pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppy flowers; mix them all together to make a paste.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of a quick plaster used for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want a solution for the healing of abscesses: take bay leaves, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, rice flour, all mixed together; they are all crushed and mixed with vinegar, unless the member is scorched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply warm water of colander or hot water to it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way to apply a poultice with stronger effect than the first one, in case of hard abscess, is to mix grated aloe and seeds of fennel, calamus, melilot, majoram, violet flowers, chamomile, any other herb in equal parts; all these are triturated and mixed with savory water or two-fold water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on the affected member before its restoration unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made; and he recommends that it should be applied with a mixture of coarse and fine materials.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A Gaul may also be used as a poultice on the broken member after its restoration, and it is effective for conditions caused by cold, just as myrrh, onions, and similar substances are useful for similar conditions.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster to an injury and relieving pain: take equal parts of moss, chamomile flowers, oak bark, and salt, mix them together, crush them, and make a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the sprain and its separation; if there is no pain or discomfort, and the bone is not broken, it is not worth separating it from its place. In this case, do not attempt to dislocate more than a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if a painful, pruritic, or inflammatory reaction occurs at the site, immediately remove the plaster or splint and refrain from applying further treatment.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and sponge marine with moist salt, immerse them in boiled water, then apply it to the site until the pain and discomfort subside; then let the member rest for an hour. Next, place over it clean wool soaked in vinegar or rose oil, wrap it up, and secure it with a bandage, ensuring there is no risk of infection and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain disappears.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that delicate compression and apply a small plaster, not straining with your initial tightness, but gently compressing until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if, after all the inflammation, pain, and other symptoms have subsided, you still need a plaster and compression, then repeat the same as you initially did at the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause occurs in the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove the bandage for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes it is left for twenty days, as you judge by the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then you adjust the compression more than your initial tightening and adjust in the thickness of the patient's food, according to the remission of the disease.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture, already dried and weakened, but it does not cover, then you know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that place; and therefore, you should poke that with hot water several times a day for three days; slightly relieve the tightness, so that through this operation, the nutrition goes to the limb, and the healing begins.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But here is what the foolish restorers of a limb fracture do when it does not heal from the beginning, according to its covering, and is healed according to its tortuosity; it is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon, he would enlarge the wound in their free spaces and turn them away from it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section:** On fractures occurring in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow, which stops all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone dislocated, just as it is in a sprain, and that's why this type is called ascial; or space cuts a fragment of the bone, cuts the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the back of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the difficulty of these two fractures is either great or small, and it can be a compression or an attrition fracture; and its cause is a blow with a heavy object or sudden impact on the bone, and they resemble each other in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, bringing the pancreas close to the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the difficulty of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a fracture that is caught in the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture that occurs either through accident or the impact of a hard object, causing some bone lamina to break off internally, and it appears in the concave area as well as when erysipelas happens due to their impact, and it is the rupture of their entry into internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is most commonly found in the bones of children, as well as when there are heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures behave similarly, as if they had separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you should return to the original state of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have come to know all these species of fracture by discerning them, and by testing their strength, and examining the evident corrupt flesh that lies upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	This capillary is known for being discovered over the bone when it is exposed, and it is cleaned, and then compressed over it, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginning of the patient's illness and its symptoms, for if you examine these symptoms, their meaning appears to be about evil. Thus, if there is vomiting from anger or extension, loss of consciousness, absence of speech, fainting, acute fever, discharge of pus, and redness of those affected, and they resemble in their major dispositions the accidents mentioned above, then it is not a cure but a disease.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you perceive non-common symptoms, you expect health, then you begin the cure for them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the pain strikes you at the onset as it does in winter, then be aware that you must study the bone's aspect on the 13th day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then be aware that you must examine the bone against the 7th day, as what remains of the bone is corrupted by the pannicul, and accidents occur that we have mentioned before.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pannicul covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then be aware that you must incise the comminuted and inflamed part, as I have mentioned before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	For it is that you open the patient's thigh, discover the bone according to custom and method as possible according to the figure of the plague, and place it lighter over the malady.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you should come upon the detection of a bone fracture, pus or abscess cautiously, then stand over it as it is covered, and this is done by placing sheets soaked in wine and warmed oil on the site, and allow the infection to rest until the abscess has subsided and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is the second of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is to cut the bone with a sharp scalpel in this way: Then administer another scalpel to it, slightly wider than that one; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer a yet wider scalpel.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you should use various scalpels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter, the latter having more acuity at their tips, made either of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their aid to facilitate the incision so that it does not harm the head or wound that area.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, remember to pierce around the edge of it before you use the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus, but rather those that do not extend the term of the bone in the testis to it, so that when the cut is made, its round extremity or margin remains over the part that leaves the head of it, resembling a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each suited to the peculiarity of each bone, as long as it is present in all parts of the brain, the extremity of which is sharp, and its length and brevity are according to the amount of peculiarity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three types of treatments: The quality of perforating in the region of a broken bone is to place the treatment over the bone and turn it within your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the location of the treatment, and pause at what lies between all of these, altering the amount of the thickness of the ray or surrounding it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with scissors what lies between each part of the bone, creating a thin wound over it in a levitative manner, as we have said, to eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool due to some reason that prompts you to approach it, using such instruments as pincers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch any cause of infection.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have perforated the bone and it is separated from infection if it continues there, and you have extracted it, be careful to rub and clean it in the roughness of it from what is in the bone, similar to a scissor, but nevertheless be careful that it be more gentle and subtler than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you break any part of the small or long bones, take hold of it with your hand as it is within your power, and apply treatment to the wound using liniment and bandages as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is to be light, far from pain, which cuts Gaul and praises for great glory; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and manifest, as long as, when you have discovered that part and have paused beneath it the extremity of this slow and gentle cutter, from which this form is.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular fracture is gentle and inflicts no cause, while the acute fracture is in two parts ahead in length, thus as it were; that the lenticular fracture be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute fracture in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then carefully strike with a small mallet on the incision of a hernia until the bone is completely separated as you rotate it, ensuring that the pannus does not occur in it and causing no harm in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their affairs; certainly, he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If a rupture occurs due to some cause attached to the pancreas in certain places of the bone, make an incision on that part of it with the tip of the scalpel, and remove it from its attachment, as it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate within the pancreas, and what has been detached or left attached to the bone is the fascia, containing its roughness and subtle lines, then you must scrape that roughness and remove those subtile lines with finely sharpened razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them as appropriate in all places of the fractured bone, according to what you discover during your operation, making sure that it is correctly aligned and shaped.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why you begin to remove the pus from those wounds, and then use it immediately on the subtle pus, and do not cease to do so continuously until you have administered the heavenly and subtle pus of all these.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small cracks or delicate breaks, be sure to administer care according to what you have learned for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all those who have studied this art have mastered it completely.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us focus on what we have written regarding major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicle (or skin) is contracted when you remove the bone, then take a cloth from it according to the size of the wound, immerse it in hot oil and place it over the wound; then take another cloth, either folded or rolled up, immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place that over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to harm the wound; and then apply a poultice with plenty of lard, and do not tighten it but let it be according to the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the healing process; then remove it and administer medicines that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of rhubarb, powder of herbs and aristologia, and similar ones.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled on the affliction when it is dry; and generally, administer to the patient all medicine of the proper kind from which he abstains and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the affliction in your treatment is clear; and do not allow any obscuration with ointments or other things; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is applied directly to the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and brings about a malign malady, affecting the patient severely.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head's cavity, as when it is cleansed of humors and more so when the treatment of them is delayed, and it becomes darker on its surface; and therefore, consider whether it happens to the patient the accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is harmful to all your skills.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the dark (or inflammation) does not subside from the medicine applied to it, but is due to that very medicine, then take a piece of honey and some finely chopped rose oil, mix them with a cloth, apply that over the affected area; and then use the appropriate remedies for healing as needed until it is cured.
Capitol .iii.	**Chapter III**
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather from two superior parts or one of those small bones, so that it has two bones in it, since the part that is displaced is cartilaginous and not actually broken, but suffers from attrition, deformity, and inflammation.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert that small piece back into its place within the nose and hold it there with the index finger on both sides until it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your ease, and be careful not to cause harm with that operation on the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not heal towards that area, then cover it so that it is equal to the extremity of the break where there is swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do it like this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And open the fracture for restoration on the first day of the break if possible; otherwise, keep the wound clean and rest the affected part for a week.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth into the extremity of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or insert two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, making sure that the swelling fills the nasal track completely.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And so some of the ancient restoratives, the swelling is infiltrated with a border, and it is changed every day, but I have not seen this; after learning that the joint is soaked in egg albumen mixed with flour powder, then place the compress until the bone is firm and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes it is found in the nose, instead of swelling, due to high fever, because it is wrapped in lion's cloth; and if you already have a fracture of the nose, the pain is intense, and the illness does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use compresses.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another situation occurs after the abscess cauterization, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or cloth soaked in hot vinegar and oil, or dust it with salt.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not accidentally cause gangrene, then cover the external wound with flour of rye and powder of crushed herbs mixed in egg albumen, and place your hand over it, pressing hard, and do not let air reach it for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you break or injure the bones of the nose with a small fracture or a cut, then you must carefully clean them and extract any debris using appropriate instruments; then, with gentle movements, close the wound, apply what is necessary for healing, and use suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must clean it with hot water and administer silver canules until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter IV.**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**On the Restoration of the Mandible when Broken.**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and not split into two and bent inward, then its healing will be slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right little finger; and with that, push the fragment of the fracture inward to facilitate its alignment outward, with your other hand from the outside of the bone's split. And do it equally well in both cases.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, so that their position can be corrected.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is damage to the teeth due to displacement, then apply those of which you expect to restore them using gold or silver or silk threads; and place a cerot over the broken mandible, and wrap it with a double cloth, and place a large sterile bandage on it decently made, or a piece equal in length to the mandible; and then secure it from above according to your equipment for binding it and the application method, as long as it is not damaged.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And instruct the patient to rest and be calm, and abstain from eating fatty foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has been altered in any way on the third day, then you should cut and loosen that which has become stuck, and correct what has been altered of it, and apply to it a powder from wheat, or egg white, or sesame flour, since you have left the bandage on it, and place over the plaster some wax.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And having thus placed and adjusted this plaster over it, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless you can loosen it after it has healed and strengthened the fracture; for usually this fracture is tight within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another severe abscess occurs, then apply what we have mentioned regarding the treatment of it while it is still fresh, and heal that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of bone or fragments, then skillfully apply whatever is appropriate for this condition in the removal of those from the tools.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound of the plague is narrow, then widen it through flailotomy according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you've removed those fragments, and if they're not yet fully healed, then widen the wound of the plague with the orifice; otherwise, place a bandage over it using whatever is suitable for that condition until it heals.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text ends abruptly with "Capitol .v." without clear context or continuation. Without further surrounding information, it's challenging to provide a precise translation for this segment. If "Capitol" refers to a specific chapter or section title, it could indicate the conclusion of a medical discussion or the start of a new topic.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork when it's broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the bones of a joint are seen to be broken, the fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether it is broken or separated or separated into two parts other than accidental strategies; it is less inclined to restoration; or it occurs in such a way that strategies occur in it, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture is like a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for that operation, when the fracture is its most severe, you must have two assistants present, one to hold and support the broken bone, and another to stretch and open up the joint.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then clamp the fracture with your hands, adjusting the position as necessary to form it according to its nature, and not in a prominent or concave manner.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, take a piece of cloth or wool and place it beneath the patient's body, adjusting its size according to your need; then stretch and raise the joint, and with your hand, compress the fracture as you clamp it.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the fork into the wound, because it is stuck in the bone, then cover the disease over its neck and place a cushion-like object on the muscle, half as large as necessary.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the attendant should press on the muscle at the wound site while ensuring that the bone of the fork is elevated and in its proper place, then correct the fracture and bind it firmly with bandages.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any fragments of the fork and they are painful, then cut them away and extract those fragments with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then make an incision from it with one of the knives you have equipped for this purpose, since you had previously placed the fork as a stabilizer; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and its shape is like this:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a cup in which this is the concavity; and its size according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or its thinness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two extremes, thus, one extreme should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the ulcer which you have incised when you have extracted the sagittaria (possibly a term for tissue or membrane) from the bone is wide, and it is safe from apostema (a condition characterized by the separation of tissues), then you adjust the two edges of the ulcer with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or you fear apostema, then you employ the ulcer with bandages and powders according to the amount of the ulcer's disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a post-hemorrhagic apoplexy occurs, pour vinegar and rosy oil on it and press upon it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone becomes stiff and its section narrow due to disease, apply a plaster made of flour mixed with egg albumen, press it firmly on the affected area, and let it dry. If necessary, add more of that paste, and then sprinkle powdered herbs twice over the foot and the plaster. Take a thin table knife whose width is about three fingers and length approximately one palm; wrap the plaster in cloth and place it over the fracture site. Apply humectant as well, turn the patient over, and press down on the affected area to ensure the plaster stays in place. Reduce the swelling, and when the bone's stiffness decreases due to this treatment, it will no longer be a problem.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Furthermore, it is important not to remove the knife from above the broken bone; so that, whenever you observe the disease recurring, if you notice that the ligament has softened or the knife has become dislodged, adjust it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's sleep (or rest) on their collarbone, and leave a small cushion under their shoulder for the sleep of it during the night; so that at that time the supporters of the patient from the side of that joint are raised, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is laid on the collarbone of that joint.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the bandage unless you happen to be near the location or there is an abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see that the patient's face is affected by it, adjust it to fit tightly, restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the furcula is healed and the wound is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in some people it is achieved in less than that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in its lateral part, but not the spine, only its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the spine is broken — and it is broken in its middle part — it is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a powdery mixture of alum and honey over the wound; stop it with a double layer of cloth; place on it a small piece of table, according to the thickness of the spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the blade is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a stop, and return the blade to its proper shape.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then apply force from above, compressing the tongue of the blade with firm pressure until it is securely in place and does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and properly adjust the blade if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula should be restored in 10 days or 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this period is complete, you will dissolve the ligament, and you must be certain that it is from the bones of which the commencement was not feared or their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the infected bone and place a chain there, then you split it open and hold it, and treat according to what we have said about the fracture of the tailbone or aplasia cauterization if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	**Capitol VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of Fractured Bones**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some bones break in the middle part of their length and healing should be allowed to proceed; however, the ends of the bone tend to fuse and heal, becoming weakened and fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And one of the complications of bone fractures is that the broken middle part inclines to dislocate and causes severe pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and intense vomiting; it is manifest within the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed supine on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the contours of their body, with subtlety in the operation of it and in the alignment according to every possible way that suits it, so that the shape of the bone is restored.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and bandage, and place over it a thin table of salt or herbs, and similar things in layers, wrapping them around; carefully bind the broken bone without causing more harm; periodically adjust the binding according to its curve on the back, and tighten that which is too loose; constantly consider the binding, and when it softens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of that which is causing corrosion, or pressure, or pain, or an abscess in the area, then you should loosen and remove it, and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred by means of healing it; and reduce the plaster, if it became too tight for the patient; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of bones when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that the fracture of ribs does not occur without a great impact on the back; and in their extremities, moving away from each other, it does not cause compression to those parts, but rather because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him should not be hidden from the senses, you must inquire about his condition.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it heals the fracture in question according to its nature, as much as possible, within the limits of what is covered, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the extremities, it causes the patient severe pain and piercing, just as piercing occurs to one who has suffered from pleurisy, and because the bone is exposed; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And ancient remedies are ingeniously crafted in this cunning art.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And regarding these, it says: "Block the patient from food that generates inflammation and gas, so that the belly is inflated and stretched, and the rupture is pushed out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should avoid this at all costs so that it does not cause a minor infection to turn into a serious one, if it happens; and if it already has, then immediately provide aid for it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also say that some remedies should be applied to the affected area to reduce inflammation and then suck out the excess fluid; it seems logical, but one must be cautious that the wind does not push the excess fluid back to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also say: "One should cover the affected area with cloth that has been soaked in hot oil, and place pillows between the ribs until it is filled, making a tight bandage according to its shape; and then it is treated for the illness with food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the illness causes violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures deeply, fear for the illness, then cover it with a bandage, uncover the broken rib, and place over it an instrument that preserves the integrity, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bone to facilitate its extraction.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is also necessary to adjust the two edges of the wound if it is large, using stitches, and dress it with bandages until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and apply poultices in rose oil and place them on the area, and treat the illness with what covers the abscess within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And raise him on the side he sleeps on until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can be fractured and their cartilage damaged, resembling the spine's vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already relaxed, numbed, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch those parts nor feel pain when pricked with a needle, then you should know that they will not recover, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel constriction and pain in the joints and pricking, then you should know that the bone's nerve is not damaged and that the illness will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider their weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that the body parts have already softened, focus on those affected areas, and when they start to gain strength and mobility, their will becomes stronger; sometimes, they might even rise onto their feet and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is a serious condition, and therefore, do not attempt any treatment for it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no specific cause is identified for those conditions, the cause might be milder and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is to perforate at the relaxation of the spine with a heated cauterize or soak it in hot oil or other extracts; place this on that area several times a day until the pain subsides from the cauterization.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a comfortable and firm bandage, tightening it over the affected area; instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain is felt until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If the dislocation occurs of a leg bone or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover it with a dry bandage and support that bone; and properly align the two edges of the wound, suturing if necessary; and carefully treat the infection to ensure healing.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of the bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, then insert your left hand's thumb into the hole on the other side of the bone, and try to fit the broken bone with your right hand as best you can; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in it, then bind them tightly and support that part, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the bowels.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the bowels are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is not uncommon in the extremities of those parts and extends inward; it causes pain to the patient at the site and a stupor in the limb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration is that you place your hand over the area above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the extremity of the bone and only that part is affected, then you should insert it again according to your knowledge, just as it was assembled in its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone and extends inward already, you should lay the patient on their stomach so that you can prepare to restore the fractured area.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have bound that, place the plaster on it, and then place a sheet of wood or canvas over it, and tighten strongly without fear of fracture or removal of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Then bind the concavity with something that fills it evenly as it takes on the shape, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess should occur carefully, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and apply to it what was previously mentioned; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the long bones or they are broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the broken assistant (or, possibly, 'helper' or 'adjunct').
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one involves taking a rough plane of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And they should be seen in both extremities of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on their side; then throw their broken arm over the rough plane until it reaches the middle point of its curve.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause or, as the minister extends it to the other parts, and the doctor places his hands on the fracture, until it returns to its place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient be placed on their back, and hold the head with one hand; then command two assistants: one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the pus from beneath; and each of them extend themselves according to their strength.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish to increase the extension further, tighten your hold on the fracture with the ligaments and with another ligament, and each of the two assistants extends themselves in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, you must stop half of the ligament on the tendon and the other side of the fracture towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the shoulder, you must stop the ligament at that place and on that shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse this in easy water and work with it, and when it is immersed according to the depth and correctly applied, tighten it if it does not cause gangrene cautiously.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If gangrene occurs cautiously, then leave the tightness within the seventh day, and place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess heals, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of tightening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on that assistant, and hold your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unfold the cloth and tighten over the arm assistant to keep the arm in place without any movement from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that it rests on the fracture that steel which is placed and firm among the other steels; it rests between each steel the width of the finger, and the length of the steels according to the break with three parts from the whole.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the steels with the tension and stricture as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the tension on the fracture site should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the further the fracture is extended, the less tension should be applied.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore, adjust the position of the steels and tension as we have said in the moment when you restore the member to its proper place, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, then loosen the tightness and the stitches within on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And thereafter, consider the dressing on all wounds for three days to prevent any occurrence of pus or inflammation; avoid food that reaches the member due to excess tightness; and thus, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that no such cause will occur, then do not loosen the ligature but instead wait for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the aid a full cloth soaked in honey, and consider at every hour of night or day that the form of the broken member is not damaged or dissolved, or that the dressing becomes soft; thus, correct it with all your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And hold the patient's food according to the order we have given before, so that the food is thin at the beginning and becomes thicker as it is consumed; and now you will notice that the patient's food becomes more substantial.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Another custom of the assistant and leg support is to be tight for 12 days; and now you will notice that they should become looser, and baths should be administered and ointments applied which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is old and inflamed, you should not loosen the bandage or remove the stitches for one to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the upper arm; of these, one is smaller, and it is this that is known as the little finger's bone, while the other is larger and is supported below by the smaller bone, extending upward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger or smaller fragment of the bone is broken, they are often cracked at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller fragment of bone is broken above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone fragment below is broken in such a way that there is a fracture, it is difficult to heal and its recovery is slow.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worst case is when two bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fragment above, it is a good sign for the doctor, as you must facilitate its restoration, which will be easily extended before it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the larger fragment is what breaks, then it requires more extensive treatment as it needs to be held in place more firmly.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are together torn, then you must hold the extraction much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must hold the shape of your hand for the restoration of it and the extension of it spread over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand on top of them, more than all the others, and the sick person should be placed on a bed prepared accordingly.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at the right height or adjust it according to his condition, so that the sick person does not have to strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends his arm from the side of the patient with his hand or instrument, and another minister extends theirs similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bone within as best as possible according to the most suitable shape.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstacles, you must then pierce and reduce all the swelling to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separated fragment that will not respond to your treatment and its restoration is not hoped for, then you must sever it and stop it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe and you have already dealt with this particular case before, then take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with a paste made of rosy oil and white wax, applying it with care between the specific and subtle muscles, and tighten the bandage slightly so that the abscess subsides; then remove the poultice and apply a plaster prepared from powdered milk mixed with clay, and place more bands; let the bandage be the one that presses most on the fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are visible in their proper positions, either in a single fracture or in two fractures at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure firmly and vigorously on the site of the fracture, and as the tightness increases in the parts above or below the fracture, lessen the pressure slightly according to the patient's pain sensation at the beginning of the treatment.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to bind them should be neither too thin nor too thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, as you observe the member's condition, and pain occurs in the member, then gently apply water to the member until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And you should not constrict the member until it is at rest, then return the tightness appropriately.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness is already relaxed and the bone has healed and appears like those, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not suffer from any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within about 2-3 days or so around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by their virtue of agile movement, and they should make that person sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even earlier in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complications and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal properly unless the cause of the injury is treated.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when an injury or fracture occurs to the hand, one must ensure that the patient remains calm and places their hand on the affected area with equal pressure.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them, ensuring they are correctly positioned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover with a dry dressing and stoppers, lest you suffer an apothema (fistula); and return the steplike bandage over it according to the quantity of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the deeper parts within the palm and it seems like a thread of cloth, then command the patient to tighten that part of their crushed palm; then take a long strip of cloth and stretch it tightly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bandage of cloth that is lifted should be applied to the palm, and tighten it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with bandages and another piece left over from the palm, so that the hand is covered and supported; and then tighten the pressure, thus as the hand is rotated to the correct position between the ligament connections.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you experience a fracture in any of the bones of the hand, if it is the thumb, wrap it tightly according to its position and immediately place a small right splint underneath to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any other bones of the hand, for example, in the middle finger, or index, or little finger, it should be wrapped and tied to the finger it affects; or all fingers can be bound together in sequence, which is better; or a small splint can be placed over it, as we have said regarding the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, the order of setting bones with care and opposition - according to your operation - concerning what is mentioned when any cause of those occurs, as described in its narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a broken thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, having moved beyond its normal position, breaks and is felt as a result of the displacement in front and due to the accumulated pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed around the fracture, and the patient is positioned on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the physician extends the ligament to its proper position according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is appropriate to operate on the thigh, then the ligament should be tightened towards the opposite side at the level of the knee, so that extension occurs in it, and another ligament is placed around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture appears to be severe, then make the ligament strong at the affected area and extend it to the adjacent parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as close as possible to their natural position, and the bone is joined by a good union; then cover it with a plaster and compression, otherwise the member may become gangrened.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If gangrene occurs in it, then leave it for a few days until the gangrene subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be done as follows: it is necessary to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and bend it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the wound.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the leg near the affected area, bringing the ends of the cloth from both sides to make it dominant over the two parts, then turn the strip over the leg and thigh, removing any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand on the thigh at the site of that fracture as support, and place one of those splints over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten the compression.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin applying a strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you increase the distance from the affected area, your compression should be weaker and lighter and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the cloth to the affected parts until they reach the toe's ankle, and tighten both ends of the splints from the other side to prevent the ligament from moving from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then carefully apply pressure to it so that no corruption, gangrene, or inflammation occurs, and it resembles these; and if any cause of those arises, then be careful to dislodge it, and correct what happens immediately, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone due to compression, then cover it as best as you can; otherwise, place something over it and rest on that, and treat what caused the pain before it becomes cured.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned properly with the legs, as we have said before regarding the assistants and the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring it in such a manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored on its own, then something other than what was applied to the other leg should be used, as it is necessary for him/her to walk without limping from the affected side.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a month or a little more, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often leads to prolonged pain, and this may result in persistent inflammation and stiffness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is often nothing more than a crack or break in its parts, and this is what is known as the plague or a great affliction, and everything has been at the expense of feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken from its parts, and this should be added and joined according to what can be done in a balanced and facile manner.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it over that round stain, if you need to; tighten the bandage around it as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus taking care and addressing anything that opposes any further accidents to what is appropriate for its healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the femur; and the other is thin and is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the arm itself, and the operation on them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the broken bone is a subtle fracture, the leg is shattered in a different way.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the broken bone is a large, severe one, you will find swelling, and it is among those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the bones according to that agreement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is clean without movement, extension should be less and lighter, and it should be supported by your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is a cause for surgery on the arm, and when you align the bones and complete all the surgical procedures, you will take wooden splints from the lower part where the causes are left behind, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; tie them gently to those that require slight tightening, and avoid using your hands, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the outer side inward to the deepest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one with a cloth in two layers according to its length, placing one at the opening of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, ensuring they are tightly wrapped around the foot's base.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then fasten the two strips at three points on each of the two extremities and in the middle point, so that this structure prevents the leg from bending at the right and left openings, and thus remains stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now, a bracer of wood is applied according to the length of the leg; it should be secured around the leg to prevent any further movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure that you do this in cases of fracture, and when the pain is truly severe.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then, each day, consider the leg and thoroughly study it, keeping an eye out for any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar issues; and when any such cause arises, be prepared to apply treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer a fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, but they do experience atrophy due to their structure.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become displaced among themselves, then the patient should lie on their side with their foot prepared in this way as they recover.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and press upon them, and squeeze them together until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the top of the foot on a small table with two plates beneath.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then stretch the foot firmly with a downward pressure, as you have wrapped it with drapes and other causes from which it needs relief.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as the condition passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, either fractured or dislocated, and the operation on these is just as known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if it is that some are fractured, then restore these, and engage those similarly as you have learned and rechecked on the said parts of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the said fractured finger in a splint according to its length, and slightly on one side; and return the foot to this table which you have rechecked, and stretch that part firmly downward.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place your hand over each one as they are wrapped in a soft cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an incision in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes of which we have spoken regarding other fractures from accidents that we have mentioned, and be prepared for any accident that may occur.
Capitol .xviii.	**Capitol .xviii.** (Chapter XVIII)
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	**On Fractures of the Hipbone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bone.**
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hipbone is broken, make a clean cut at the site of the fracture, then gently incline the bone towards the center of the body slightly, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the incision with wool, making it as wide as possible; and the woman is made to stretch her legs little by little, until everything is removed from within so that the wound opening is in front of the severed tendon and bone fragment.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place pillows on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them remove the bandages, collect the urine, clean and return it according to the same method as before, and then return them to their initial position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, as it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a small bladder of a sheep and place a cane tube over the wound; then insert the whole bladder into the opening in the tendon, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, as the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with a bandage and left for some days, according to our recommendation, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and stitching the treatment that we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be overlooked in these close fractures, and there is little risk, especially to those who have some knowledge and understanding of this my book; for that fracture reveals to you in the greatest dispositions for your safe restoration and tightening of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's testicle when it is crushed, take a cold compress from above and place it on that; then wrap it with a cloth, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are injured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an injury, especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or a similar one, that you immediately perform a flebotomy on him, provided that the circumstances of a flebotomy at your disposal or recommended by witnesses allow it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the injury exudes pus, then know that you must cauterize it with a hot iron in such a way that you cover it with a clean bandage after three days, unless another cause requires otherwise.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture within a few days, and do not prolong it, unless gangrene occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you experience an apothema (abscess) carefully, leave its restoration inside for up to nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and do not touch it on the third, fourth, and fifth day of each week, lest you cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone breaks and is prominent through the exposed skin, cover it to prevent further damage, and use your hands or tools with ease and minimal extension to reduce and secure the broken part.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extent of the damage requires more than your hands, use a tool; and this tool should be made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits (roughly spanning from thumb to pinky), and a width corresponding to the severity of the injury; for this reason, it is essential that a physician chooses among these three or four tools according to the amount needed for treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And both should be made to fit closely, so that they do not bend or shift during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it has its most acute extremity where its margin is in its own extremities; and above it should be tightly stretched, and from its middle within the partitions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "voluntary hernia" in Greek, hence the term 'paleta' (a small palate) is used.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the purpose that the acute extremity of it is elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it pulls in one swift motion as the bone returns to its place, and is wrapped with some bandage.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus it wraps the extremities of the fracture around each other; and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not take the instrument well for some reason, then you must insert the tip of that bone within the instrument's reach.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut open that part which we have mentioned for them to insert the scissors, or saw off one of the bones in any way possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cut off the one that grows on the bone with roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned and the patient finds severe pain, know that the bone has not yet returned to its natural place; and thus do this so that you bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, immerse a lint in a black astringent, and especially if it's summer, do not place any cloth or other substance on the wound, so as to prevent it from becoming infected and corrupted.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply staples at the appropriate time during the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that it can be cut with scissors and bandaged according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to strain the wound against the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, causing their patients harm or even death from infection or gangrene; it is unwise.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the fracture's tension is slight, flexible, different from other fractures' tension.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are concerned about further complications as we have discussed, and you feel pain at the site, do not apply pressure over that area, but rather make a wrap with a hard cloth in place of staples and tighten it around those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the pain has begun, perhaps a day or two later, having created a bruise in that part, you remove from over it the cloth which you had placed, and then administer some treatment, those which by our custom are used to treat bruises, thus as with a tetracyclic ointment and similar things.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is appropriate for you to loosen the ligature and consider the wound each day and evening until it is healed and stabilized, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the distant parts more easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound has passed many days and is not healed nor does the bruise separate from the limb, then you should know that here are stages of the small plague so that in every place where the bruise tries to heal, it will be hindered.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those stages, some are separated and removed, while others are not and put the member under pressure, causing pain. Therefore, cut into those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, which are signs of infection and decay, then you should treat each one as appropriate for the cure, which was preceded by a description in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I should say and you present your case: when the bone is cracked, it protrudes over the member along with the bones of the thigh and the helper, resembling those of the larger members, and do not attempt to attract or extract it under any circumstances, as this may cause death; after cleaning that area, wait for it to heal, which can take several days; and treat the wound if you see it, and leave it if not.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	**On the Cure for Nodosity That Occurs at the Site of a Fracture.**
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Movements witnessed during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, are caused by the shape of the affected member, and greatly hinder its normal function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the movement is recent and administer those medicines that have been effective for it, such as aloe, fennel, and others similar to these; in this way, you take some or all of them, and apply those with a stinging quality, or albumen from milk, or bitter wine, and rest the affected area with a compress, and tighten around it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And be aware of the constriction that does not loosen for several days; then release it and apply another, as long as the movement persists; or place a sheet of lead on top, because lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the movement has already turned into a rigid contraction and it is caused by a necessity to prevent damage, then divide it with the most superior part of the affected area, remove excess and prominent parts, or cut them off as needed, until the movement is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures, when the bone is restored and then it is bound with a splint, the delicate member should be handled gently according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored and the delicate member is bound, it should not be done for trivial reasons: among which one is the abundance of solution for the ligament and the binding of the fracture, not according to what is needed; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments preventing nutrition from reaching the member; or due to excessive oozing; or due to improper movement at an inappropriate time; or due to lack of strength in the spine during the patient's illness, and due to debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to restrict the patient's movement and make their heart tender while the swelling increases in them; and administer baths, and gently massage it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place your hand over the member, so that the grip draws to it the most nutritious fluid, or continue rubbing it with lukewarm water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the healing of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of their covering is prohibited.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its tortuosity and deviation from the bone is sought, and by doing so the shape of the member is corrected; nevertheless, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, as long as you receive permission from someone who considers that member newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is highly vilified, losing great fear of the sign of which it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If recent claudication and nodation are present, then cover them in a poultice of herbs that soften the pain, such as mullein and chamomile, and similar ones; apply a mollifying plaster to it, or use a paste of mullein root mixed with lard or olive oil, and wrap it up; or use fat figs pressed into pigeon droppings, and similar ones to those used in medicines called "amermans consolidatio.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes, it is dissolved with frequent light friction on the most humid parts, and the affected member should be moved through all its ranges several times a day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has progressed and become hardened and curved into a stone, causing pain and requiring treatment with iron, then you should note that pus has ceased to form and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised where excess nodulation of that joint interferes with movement, using delicate saws, and ease is provided for that part through rest and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the topic of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the condition when one of the body's joints becomes dislocated, rendering it immobile and causing the shape of the affected member to be distorted, leading to severe pain and injury in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is usually necessary to pierce (or reduce) it as soon as possible; if this is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and rigid, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so it is important not to move or stretch the joint excessively during the period of stiffness, as this can cause muscle spasms and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this occurs, you must prepare for a fluortomies of the hernia, and place something that will rest on the aperture; then the member should be soaked in lukewarm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with water, the memory of which will return to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as previously mentioned in the fracture; from the departure of the upper body into the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated without injury, the dislocation of both is caused by one of two methods: either they are pulled from their places with a slight movement and become slightly relaxed; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so that saliva from the wound cannot exit, and he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is wrapped in its own secretions.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own without a significant cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to gently reduce it without delay, so that it does not remain stretched out.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have the patient's head in his hands, and the doctor should insert one finger into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if it is on one side; or he should insert both fingers together, if it is on two sides, and all other fingers should be outside to which they are opposed; and he commands the patient to cease moving his jaws and relax them so that they return to their proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then evaporative treatment with water and oil should be administered so that a gentle reduction of both can be achieved without delay, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when we return and find them equalized, the mouth of the hernia is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of cloth cerot over those powder-like drapes, and apply wax and rubbed oil; and afterwards, make it smooth and easy with soft bindings.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep with their hernia on their back, and have their head between two pillows, so that they do not wince to the right or left; and do not force them to chew; having taken their food, wait until the pains subside and the jaws are relaxed, then let them eat what they will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their proper places, then fevers and persistent vomiting occur, and the patient's stomach is greatly disturbed, and strong vomiting of pure bile occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and many times the patient dies within a few days of this happening.
Capitol .xxv.	**Chapter 25**
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	**On Reducing Dislocations of the Furca (Elbow) and End of Muscle**
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furca (elbow) is not dislocated from the socket within due to the continuation of its tendon; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer joint, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then you tighten the area with your palm using a firm compression, so it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply pressure over that dressing and poultice and tighten it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Apply the edge of that which has dried on the wound and is continued there, it should not be displaced for some days; then it must be cleaned and bandaged as we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure over that dressing, poultice, and compression, and instruct the patient to adhere to rest and tranquility until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this treatment, the cure is reduced when the extremity of the muscle is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Chapter XXVI** (This indicates the chapter number, not a translation.)
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways: one of which is dislocated at the attachment to the bone at its insertion.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the attachment of the muscle, and this is done with care; it is not dislocated at the back attachments through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front attachments by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out at the attachment of the tendon on the inside, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is slightly dislocated; but more often in those where there is much flesh, it is stuck outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer accidents through blows or falls, and the muscle of him is marked with a bruise, frozen from freezing, and it is torn by what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then understand that your breath enters here while you are lying on it, and you will proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips from its place; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, as you find great diversity among them; and you will find in the head of the muscle a concave shape and the tendon slipped from touch against the head of the muscle just like a nut, and the patient cannot return their hand to its normal position nor move it without pain.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated at the foot or ankle, and you find clear signs of injury, it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, slight reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the hand is raised towards the affected part; then the servant places his fingers under the tendon, and raises the joint to its place with strength, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and he holds it there until it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It is not possible to provide a precise translation without further context and a deeper understanding of the historical language used. However, based on the given text, here is a best-guess translation line by line:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then place the patient back on their feet, with their toes pointing downwards, awaiting that they be slightly bent between relaxation and tension, and the doctor places his hand on the expectation, lifts the head of the muscle towards verticity, pulls the patient's toe away from the joints so as not to be damaged when returning, and another assistant holds the patient's foot so it is not injured upon return.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce this second in this manner: make sure to have a stronger person than the patient, stand on their side, insert their muscle between the patient's toes and lift the toes towards the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the patient's toes away from the abdominal parts.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lighter, then be sure to check what else may cause them to be suspended, so as to address that issue, for the dislocation may return at any moment.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with a rounded end like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is positioned beneath the patient; drapes are then laid over the head of the stick, and the patient's pain should be aligned with the length of the stick, and the doctor's hand is extended to the opposite side; and the patient's body part on the other side is strengthened, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is about two arms' length and its width four digits; shape it away from the handle as follows:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then cover the rounded end with lion's fur to prevent the stick from irritating the pain.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then pause the patient on their side, and extend your hand or arm over the chest within the gaps, and lay the chest upon the assistants, the arms, and the end of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then pause the arm on a scale according to its length, and extend your hand over the gaps, while the other hand is suspended on the other side, so that the joint might be within reach.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is complete according to any method that is possible for you, and it becomes clear that you have paused the flow of blood from the veins of both legs, then prepare a plaster with fine powder from mills mixed with egg albumen over all the muscles, so that they are turned away from each other, and tighten the bandage over the area; let the ligament be turned over the plaster, and attach your hand to the patient's collarbone, and leave it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to provide the patient with moderate food, until the member is relieved, for it aids in the healing of the injury.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then the food should be increased gradually and a movement made; and if it stops and does not improve, then healing has ceased.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or other cause, then it should be treated with cautery according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and compression are removed from him several times, and he cannot raise that arm due to pain, then know that the nerves in it, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or relaxed, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is caused, you must return the foot and the ankle or the joints behind, reduction is made with pressure and extension with the hands, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both these strains should be treated, and care taken until they are healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes more serious in the member and delays its movement, then the illness uses frequent baths to alleviate this gravity until it is removed and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, most notably towards the front compared to behind, and the dislocation is not concealed when you look at it or touch it, according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip joint, this is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscles.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And take care to cover the cuts, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to a safe point, for if it reaches a dangerous state, reduction becomes difficult, and recovery is not certain; especially when it affects the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain and often leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, involves extending the doctor's hand with two more fingers, spreading the patient's leg, and placing the doctor's hands on the patient's thighs and pushing the joint back into place using the pads of their fingers or the palm of their hand until it returns to its original position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in front of the body, then return the hand by bending it towards the patient's thigh, and push against the thigh with the palm of the hand until the dislocated part returns to its original position.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And indeed, two ministers should extend the arm, and have this observation by two ministers so that there is no doubt about the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arm over completely, as it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over their hand, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that these causes which help in lubricating the joint and facilitate its return. Then he gently pushes and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the reduction should be made so that it is paused over the paste in which there is tightness and execution with white of egg, and be extracted and relaxed gently, and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is loosened; so if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave it be.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not too strained, you repeat the plastering and loosening of the ligament, leaving it for a few days until it is completely relaxed; then you loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it is a serious case where the joint is in an unstable position and in movement, then moistening with baths and subtle friction, along with compression, should be applied until it is alleviated; or rest should be provided on the affected joint during the day and night, especially if it involves a fatty motion.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then you should immobilize it and place that in a bath; and when the swelling subsides, rub the joint with warm friction, repeating this three times daily, especially if it is painful on movement.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bathwater, until it is calm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, press on that moist and raw fissure of the cow with your hand and apply pressure; do this several times, as it is moist and yielding.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is in the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In certain cases, the shoulder may be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate; conversely, other joints may be more easily reduced, but it is nevertheless crucial to act swiftly in reducing a dislocated shoulder immediately after it occurs, before the area becomes numb or develops an inflammation.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and make them extend their hand, while the doctor places his hand or palm over the joint's proximity, and gently push until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm has already been placed on the patient's belly, then the patient should position their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurred before the back of the hand, then the doctor's hand must be positioned intrinsically over the table in order to press against the joint's proximity.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if this is done quickly, it is good; otherwise, gently press the bandage over the hernia and leave it; and do not worry about it, for if you do not attempt to reduce it within a few days, it will not heal or be able to be reduced.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint of Rome must be handled according to its curvature; it does not notice any cause of pain, but the hand becomes softened and cannot hold any cause; then you will know that the nerves are torn or crushed, and there is no pain in it unless it is tightened with a cautery near its accommodation and strongly applied, it confers some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the illness returns, you must apply the poultice that we have prepared and leave it for several days; then loosen it and leave it and exercise your hand on it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some injury occurs, then apply a cold water compress and friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the Treatment of Dislocated Joints**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some times the joints are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the abdomen, squeeze it and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns to its proper position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the joint, suspend the affected part to prevent further displacement, and leave it in that position for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and stretch it until it is correctly aligned on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to this account, continue to stretch it and do not cease to move it in the day, and stretch it at night; do this for several days until it is completely straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it look like this, if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and join them to each other, and perform the first operation on it, as long as it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it look like this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the spinal or cervical vertebrae are completely dislocated, causing them to be out of their normal positions, this is a serious condition. If left untreated, it can lead to permanent damage and even death due to the severity of the illness.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient cannot control their condition, and often experiences weakness in certain parts of their body, such as legs or both legs or arms, or even a spinal vertebra is dislocated, as often times these are displaced and removal to four parts is necessary.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that part is now cleansed at the back and is called hernias.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for hernias is that you must consider whether the hernia occurred due to childhood, because at that time it is neither curable nor will it heal completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where you see it [the hernia] due to an accident or impact or something similar, the ancients spoke of treatment in lengthy speeches, of which the most beneficial results are obtained; but I have already briefly discussed this, from which little excuse can be made for the excessive protrusion, due to my proximity to understanding, by which I have here expounded and formed various instruments with which I will now spread and space out that same hernia.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in hernias that occur on the front part of the foot, there is neither cure nor healing for them; similarly, in those that are formed at the sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs in the back specifically due to this condition can be cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And this disease is so widespread on the body that it affects both sides near the walls, and it extends below causing great pain so that the hands cannot be moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot around the patient's head, and another stick is positioned with the patient's legs on either side of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The practitioner holds the stick, and it should not be buried in a hole; another practitioner holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then they wrap around the patient's head and below the shoulders, tighten the ties, and extend one end of the tie to the stick that is placed on their head, tying it there; similarly, they tie the other end to the stick placed under their legs, which supports their hips, and adjust all the ties, tying them to the other stick intended for the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the surgeon should extend the casing of the splint to cover the fracture, and ensure that both legs and their ligaments in the places where they are attached are not damaged, but nevertheless not too tightly secured as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it heals, or he places one hand on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they heal.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not heal in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is three arm-lengths, and dig into the wall where we have said that the disease is most present.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, stretching until the spine is straightened and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open it again with your hand; and since you must stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of your two fists, their length being equal to an arm's length, and the head of the hernia in the palm of each hand exactly, so that there is a cut in each fist where the threads run through, and each finger is firmly planted on the ground so as not to slip.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another fist with which to turn it, and twist it in the two channels of both fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a channel in which the fist is formed, its length being a palm where it is twisted; and in the other two fists, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened around the patient's chest at the opening where their head is placed, and the ligaments you have tightened in their thighs at the turn which is meant for their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies the same treatment to the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then, when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleaned, apply a dry, coagulant paste made from alba (a type of clay) and stop it; then place a bandage over the paste, taking care that its width is three times or so the length of the affected area, and its length covers the spot of inflammation, and around the spine's joint.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then, using the remedy we have mentioned, nourish the patient with subtle, healing foods.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any signs of recurrence are observed in the area after healing, it is necessary to administer drugs that soften and soothe with long-term table administration, which we have recommended; this treatment is already being given through a lead sheet placed on that spot.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, a severe pain occurs at the back of the spine, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should be aware of, as it is very likely to cause death if not treated properly with this medicine.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Capitol .xxxi.**
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the hip joint and the muscle joint should not be dislocated so easily, and it only happens to those who experience other joints with minor displacement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either it is displaced inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of a dislocated hip inward is that, when you adjust the patient's leg to their body, the opposite side becomes longer, and the affected side is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee normally, and this is the place where the tendon becomes attached in a hooked shape, so that the head of the bone has already been displaced here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation is when parts are separated outside, because the accidents of it are opposed to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of someone who suffers from dislocation in the front parts is when they stretch their leg according to the injury, but nevertheless do not fold the joint where the pain is located, and if it perforates to the point of being unable to move it forward towards the front parts; then the urine of the patient is retained and the hernia of the patient is palpable, and you must move the patient's leg over the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of someone who suffers from dislocation in the back parts is that they do not stretch the joint, nor can they bend what bends the hernia, and the leg of the patient is shorter on one side than the other, and the hernia becomes softer, and the head of the object is turned to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been reduced by itself or properly treated according to its position, then it is not in that cure of all; and thus it does not cover that there is some provision made for it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place it in that case where the dislocation is recent and it is one of the four types of dislocations; then apply pressure to bring the joint back and stretch it on both internal and external parts, and turn it to the right and left, for thus it will quickly return and need no other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the joint below, or use a strap, or a tight bandage that is placed over the leg; another minister should stretch the hand of the patient in such a way that he places his fingers on the testicles of the patient; and another should tighten the bandage around the base of the thigh and have someone else hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the leg or the internal part to angle the joint from the fork's position, or from the rear part to the front of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And at the same time, all of those should be extended until the patient is raised to a sitting position and their legs hang down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is especially important for all four limbs.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding its treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocated joint, when the dislocation is internal, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligament should be tightened over the area where the thigh joins the pelvis, and extended from the angle to the highest point of the femur.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's thighs, press the painful area deeply, and extend it outward with strong extensions to force the joint back into place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specific type is of a lighter cure which reduces this member more than others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from you and you do not obey the treatment for this type of cure at all, then understand that both feet of the patient must be tied together with a light, weaker ligature on both the toes and both the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part is according to four units, and the affected leg must be extended more than the other by a quantity of two units.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia must be suspended over the top of the leg, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is the quantity of two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the hernia, and hang it from another young person, while another young person presses the hernia with force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction of a dislocation that has gone outside, it is necessary to keep the patient immobile on the affected leg as we have recommended in its immobilization; and tighten the ligament specifically on the injured leg and on the chest of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then place two sticks as supports, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and place a stick adjusted in the middle of the buttocks over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the disease is not aggravated by the stick being wedged between the patient's legs, so you must prevent the extension to the parts below from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant should extend themselves to their part, and the doctor with his hand tightens the reduction according to art (or skill).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you reverse the procedure, it will be greatly harmful; otherwise, persevere diligently and as we have said in the previous discussion about its immobilization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Ensure that the patient lies on their back at ease.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you must extend the leg slightly, and according to this method, as I have described for the foot; the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the affected limb, then with his other hand he pulls it, holding that position until the dislocated part returns to its place.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you will not extend the patient, but rather raise him above the ground; once you have confirmed that he is resting on a hard surface, thus as we have said about his position on two surfaces; and his face and limbs are extended, as we have mentioned, without any harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, once the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, since you extend two legs from the patient's condition, and when you see those folds and the hernia extrudes its leg and you expand that excuse, then you know that the member according to need has been returned — and now you adjust two things and apply paste and remove the bandage so that the wound is not worsened in either of the parts; and keep the herniated person at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the ligament and paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those folds on the surface, then you will know that the dislocation is already closed, and so you can let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and paste that, remove that according to your first stretch, and let it heal in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then carefully remove that, and make him walk slowly for some days, until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outwardly, inwardly, or to the side, and not forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the affected area; then you know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient cease their movement, if possible, extend their leg, place their back against a wall, and rest their foot between their legs; then adhere your hands to the joint, press firmly between your fingers on the dislocated joint until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery for them is that their leg sticks to the thigh in a non-painful position.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to hold the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandage.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, as long as they are healthy and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer extensive treatment with medications whose use in the cure of the aforementioned hernia has been described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii represents the chapter number, not a part of the text itself.)
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the toe is broken by a minor removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the toe appears swollen proceeding to the joint at which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation of the toe is by gentle reduction, and it should be extended at ease to the muscles and wrapped until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must cease the injury immediately, and have a strong and capable assistant apply pressure behind the toe at its middle joint.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then with your right hand, gently raise the foot from the superior part, and with your left hand, hold the lower part of the foot in its joint.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then slowly stretch the foot to the right with your left hand, and make two strokes with your right hand on the left side, and extend it; then push the foot of the patient towards the bed with your right hand while keeping the leg straight.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot of the patient towards the bed for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one stroke or two according to this method, and turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and take a firm piece of wood, and place it between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped cloth over them so that they do not rub against each other.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the surgeon should hold the patient's legs, and another minister should extend the foot according to its joints or binding that lies on the collar of the foot; and another minister should spread it against the extension of his side, and the padding or bandage between the thighs of the patient should retain it, so that the movement of the operation is not pulled away from the parts left after its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor should dislocate it with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns to its place easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction of the foot is healthy, then apply a plaster and reinforce that binding strongly, and tie the foot with binding to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the binding over those is not violent and damages them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the swelling subsides, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or the fourth, remove that, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to move that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be further aggravated and corrupted, and this may lead to a condition that does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you experience an abscess cauterization, then apply what we mentioned earlier in the narrative regarding treatment and washing, as long as it remains undried.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to the beginning of a new chapter, but without further context or a complete text, I can only translate the heading.)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the joints of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	He understands that when a joint is dislocated, it should be gently reduced to its proper position; and for those cases where it is not difficult, it is better to leave it alone.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, then you should know that the patient's foot should be held still by a splint either on the ground or on a table, and left in that position as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should stand by the foot, place your hand over what seems to be affecting the joints, gently press the foot towards it until you feel the dislocation return, and ensure that what was previously dislocated is now reduced and does not protrude from the affected area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a board under the patient's foot that takes the entire weight of the leg, with two ends, and tighten it gently but firmly for three days; thereafter, remove it and allow the patient to walk gradually, over several days, until complete healing is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that occur due to illness, fracture, or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs, and you focus on the treatment and restoration of it, sudden complications can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, one should not imagine that they know how to cure it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, of great experience, mercy, and compassion; tardy, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses beginning medicines with caution, avoids extreme measures, leaves the judgment to God, unless you expect health from death, alleviation from illness, and have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, one should strive as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying extreme measures.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns to its proper place, administer treatment with gentle cautery and cure the affliction using dry compresses as appropriate for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If there is a dislocation and fracture of the bones, causing them to separate, then you should puncture their joints, as we have said regarding simple injuries of this type, which are mentioned in the places of these.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be mindful and cautious regarding the use of medicines in the pathways of fear, as my previous instruction has guided you; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and brings greater health to your true body in its proper time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, end the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
