Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, as you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its author, and due to its expositions, and its declarations, it seems to me that you have achieved great proficiency in this treatise, which is a part of the most important operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The most important operation, surgery, is scorned in our region and in our time as being entirely useless, since the science of it has fallen into decline; and there are only a few small descriptions of it found in the books of the Ancients, which have led to greater confusion and error, as the understanding of it is closed and its power extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has been observed by me that this treatise should be revived according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments are added to the explanations, and in preparation for the operation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which our skilled artisans are not as effective in this our time is because the art of medicine is complex, and requires expertise in the science of anatomy to understand the youth of the members and their forms, the conjunction and separation of them; knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of these, and the extraction of them; as well as the pulsing veins and those that are tranquil, and the locations of the emission of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, but in practice, it is small, especially in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not aware of what we have said about anatomy, will not be exempt from falling into errors that lead to the death of men, as you have seen many such people who are formed in this science but lack knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Why do you see a foolish doctor who has incurred a scrofulous abscess in the thigh of a woman, and cut some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flowed until the woman died between his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you saw another doctor who prescribed a stone from a man who had suffered in his state; the stone was large, and it came to him and tore that stone with part of his bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for help to extract it, and you saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you saw another doctor who was paid handsomely by a duke from our land for surgery, and he took a black crust that was badly broken in the patient's thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture above the wound, with pincers and clamps with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then, according to the patient's desires, remove the bandages, rest, and apply poultices for some days, and order that we loosen the ligature; and thus, too, if it concerns the foot or any other part, we must act carefully to avoid harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you, who have been called to loosen the ligature, achieve peace and thus ameliorate their pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, it cannot be restrained, and the corruption does not cease to spread throughout the member until the danger of the illness passes.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there is another physician who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes inflamed for some days, until the evil of it grows stronger under his control.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes the pain to be pure from melancholic humors, so it does not cover that it will reach him entirely, but rather affects the member where he suffers most intensely.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, my sons, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work that poses danger to the most important dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where various operations are discussed, which involve error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and set aside those things so that the foolish people do not take them as grounds for speaking against you and slandering you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, set aside the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and abandon those things that make you afraid, so that your courage in your faith and in your name does not desert you: for there is more remaining for your glory, both now and forever after, in the world and behind your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	They already dissected in some of their own signs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad ailments poorly, so that bad doctors do not become renowned.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter organized within the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and the tools of cautery, and anything necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter concerns incision and puncture, and the use of suckers, plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters organized according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and realignment, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter organized on internal foot structures and the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery youth and the documents of it is a long and prolix speech, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a small part of their speeches, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will apply to every universal connection, which is of matter or by matter, except for two connections, which are connections with their own matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the connection that is dry and lacks matter, opinions differ; some say that cautery is beneficial for such conditions, while others claim the opposite, stating that cautery is not suitable for ailments characterized by dryness and scarcity, as the nature of fire is qualities and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat a condition that is dry and lacking in moisture with heat and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who claim the opposite state that cautery is beneficial for all dry and scurvy ailments in the bodies of men, as when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the connection of fire, you find the body of man hard.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And they say through the words of that one, that they have already experimented with this several times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable for this to be performed by someone who has never been trained and practiced in the art of cauterization, as he/she must know the diversity of human body structures and the disposition of ailments within them, their causes, and the circumstances surrounding their occurrence, and the passage of time.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other cases, there is no cause for fear, especially in dry and humid ailments, as all doctors agree on these, and they are consistent in the use of cauterization to treat them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by fire and the goodness of this method, which is called cauterization, lie in the fact that fire is simple; its action affects only the member that is being cauterized, without harming other members or causing great pain.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members where it is applied and strongly drives away the pain from difficult-to-heal parts of the body.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm, but rather serves. It has long been known through experience and the long service of studying the art over the truth of causes; therefore, you are excused from the length of this speech. If it were not that I keep secret in this brief moment the fire's power and quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion of ailments, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would sharpen your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know this, my sons, that the times when it is most suitable to perform cauterization and make bandages are in the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is suitable at all times, so that the damage caused by time is overshadowed by the healing power of cauterization, especially when cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, severe and sharp, which do not suffer from delay, for it is feared those that come with ill will, who are better off asking for small harm to enter at a later time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And therefore do not sit on your feet, my children, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who consider this illness, which is healed by cautery, never truly cured, leaving behind that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humidity, which are the causes why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet physicians may use cautery excessively for the sake of their skill, virtue, and the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the condition of the illness and the location of the pain, and the virtue of the treatment, and what has been prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has come to them through food and similar causes; for the illness on which cautery is performed is a subtle illness in a few members with excessive humors and moisture, so with teeth cautery for pain and similar, it is possible that that pain may not return, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is often said in popular speech that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and although it seems the most effective, I do not believe it to be a cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause, except through cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	But the truth is otherwise; and I understand that the statement "cautery is the last remedy of medicine" only holds when the methods of treatment in certain illnesses are ineffective, and those medicines do not help, so at the end of the cause, one administers cauterization and takes advantage of it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	From here it follows that cautery is considered the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of popular opinion and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that the gold cautery is better than the iron cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of the metal and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely necessary, which is not always true, because one already knows and has experienced that cautery with fire works only in certain bodies for others; but nevertheless when you make cautery with gold fire, it is not declared to be yours, because the gold is consumed according to the amount you want for its brightness, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you place it over the fire, the gold melts into the fire, and sometimes certain sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman can catch them due to his occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cautery with iron must be performed more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already organized this chapter on cautery according to other chapters, and you have ordered those within the feet first, so that I will now ask him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for head pain caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers humidity and coldness upon the afflicted part, which are two causes of sudden and multiple rheumatic flux, called rigor, from the head to the extremities of the limbs and of the auricles, numerous sleeping disorders, and pains in teeth and throat, and generally all ill health resulting from cold, as well as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is that first, you command the patient to evacuate the malady using lacrimal medicines for three or four nights, depending on the nature of the malady, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head, and arrange that tool between your fingers on a clean bench, and place your hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your palm's edge near the sole between his toes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the affected area of the middle part of the body has been identified, press it with your hand to test, and then apply the olive-shaped cautery, which is like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place it over the healthy area without pressing, in a way that descends, so that your hand is constrained little by little, and you lift it up.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then slowly lift your hand and examine the area, and if you see that any bones are exposed, along with an amount of blood, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that position, or another part of the cautery, as it is cooled, it is seen that the bone about which I spoke above.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the affected area near the edge, leaving the inner part to be destroyed by the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the remedy for the pain using a four-ingredient mixture until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the better the bran (or perhaps 'arm') gets, making it more robust and rejuvenated.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They also say that with the cautery, the back should be protected until the bone completely hardens, and this is the method of achieving small bones:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that from that place vapours of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but only in certain cases out of fear; leave that to me, for what is best for health when it is present, as we have witnessed with the other members, and especially when the head of the malady is of a heated nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that is first mentioned is indeed more safe and better for me; from that comes health and success to the work.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic pain occurs throughout the head and this prolongs the illness, and treatment is with drugs, poultices, cauterization, and other remedies, and especially if a cautery has already been applied that does not alleviate or benefit from any of those causes, then consider whether the nature of the disease is strong; and if there is no great inflammation or severe pain, then apply another cautery to it a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on the side of their head with an iron cautery, as long as the skull is cracked.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skull and expose the amount we have found, then cauterize that with an iron cautery on the rear part of the head at a place called the 'vat',— which is the area where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	Then place your hand over it and do not expose the bone, because this disease causes great pain unlike any other cautery on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, for this cautery with which the horns of the head and the occipital are cauterized is a subtler cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	It appears that your message got cut off or there was a typo. "Capitol ters" does not provide enough context for me to guess the intended meaning. Please provide more details or clarify what you need assistance with. I'm here to help!
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	**On the treatment of old migraines.** 
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe headache occurs at the base of the skull or pain is felt in the eye, the head should be treated with medicines that clear it, and other treatment as mentioned for various ailments; if it does not improve, cauterization is performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Cauterization with burning medicines involves taking a hot iron, cutting off the affected part, and ablating the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the area of pain in the temple with a lancet, making a small incision until the cord is exposed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply pressure over it tightly by constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage, lay open the wound, and leave it uncovered for two or three days, and then apply a cold compress until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment within which it shall heal.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, make use of some of the medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization may be performed in this manner: take a fire of the cautery whose form is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a keyhole because its head is shaped like a claw with no curvature, and at its middle location there is a slight prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then apply pressure to the site of pain, holding your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turning the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood that is congealed due to the specific nature of the wound is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vessel, raise your hand so that the artery below is not congealed, preventing the flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then immerse the affected area in salt water, place a compress over it, and leave it for three days; then apply a lot of hot compression, and treat with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the edge of the knife with fire according to the cautery, and be careful not to make an arterial incision in this migraine specifically ancient.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of ancient migraine cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating ancient migraine as we have described in the previous treatment and divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not work and the illness persists, you should perform a cutaneous cauterization with a knife until it is albified (whitened), indicating that the pain has been alleviated along the line of length from which the greatest part of the said migraine originates or that point; then place your hand over the area once and press strongly to pierce through the arteria and reach within the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to prevent the continuation of the mandible, which is damaged and impairs chewing, that the tear is not aggravated and the nerves, which cause pain in it, are not affected, and that no spasms occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is regarding the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is ruptured, as in the case of a rupture, there is fear, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack study and patience; and let the operation on him begin at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And bring to mind the treatment of the flow of blood from an artery accident according to their method in their place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this malady does not respond to the cautery and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned earlier, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have said in the chapter on the narrowing of archery with a cautery that has two points, this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text is organized into chapters, indicated by "capitols." The term "v." might be short for "versus" or "concerning," suggesting that this particular chapter deals with a specific medical topic. Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to provide a more precise translation of "Capitol v." but it could be interpreted as "Chapter concerning..." or "Medical Treatment: The Chapter on...
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the Cauterization of Ear Pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as I have mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, then apply fire with a cautery, and this is called the "pointed" cautery, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the pointed cautery close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire ear as if it were being turned, or in any way necessary if the pain is in any part of it.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Apply the cautery to the edge of the auricle little by little until you have cleaned the area thoroughly.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make points with the cautery on the whole auricle, cut those off, and then care for the areas until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De cauterizacio de turtura.	**On the Cauterization of Torturous Growths**
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torturous growths that are cured and the cauterization thereof are merely of the kinds that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of ill-health.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the kind that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that specific type of torture with pullings and stretchings and gurglings, and you do not confirm your treatment, then know that you cauterize the malady in three places: the first is the root of the auricle, the second a small opening on their temple, and the third the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And stop your cautery when the opposite of the affected area is treated, for relaxation will only occur where the problem is resolved.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you apply the cautery to the right of the tip of the auricle, then place a small amount on the crown of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which corresponds to the length of the finger, and hold your hand as a cautery until the quantity of the essence of the cord is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the cutlerie, the shape of which is placed on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is a subtle matter that one should observe with careful attention; it requires that you remove any excessive roughness from it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully care for the area that has been treated until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII**
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	**Ancient Cauterization for Apoplexy**
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and its treatment has not been effective, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize with four cautery burns: first on all corners of the head; second, apply cautery to the middle part of the head, as mentioned earlier; third, cauterize the nape (back of the neck).
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of applying the cautery is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and is more painful; and then it should be treated with what you have prepared.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion done with flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Understand that small grains and pills should be given to the patient at the beginning, gradually increasing their dose, as the serving physicians understand best.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and place your hands on their crown, applying the plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And do this at certain intervals, as it is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so it is for those who are healthy; but if not, make three cuts on the back of their head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part behind the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And after each cut, apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and then carefully tend to the cut with the appropriate remedies.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you can add to it and the patient tolerates it, make a cut in the middle of the affected area; and if you need even more help, cauterize over both heels.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Tend to the inside until it is healed; and make the olive cuts according to the shape as previously shown.
Capitol .ix.	**Capital IX.**
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	**On the Treatment of Parasites and the Softening of the Entire Body.**
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	**As you have described the process of softening, proceed to treat the head; remove the patient's hair, apply a pointed cautery at the exact location, cauterize all parts of the head, and cauterize the lower part, as well as three times on the spine, on the back.**
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	**And if, in the case of severe softening of the body, and the patient endures great pain, apply four cauteries on the spine, then later apply another cautery until the intense pain subsides, and raise the patient's hand.**
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	**And take care that it heals properly; this is the olive cautery.**
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	**On the treatment of epilepsy.**
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epileptics should not be cauterized, but rather those seizures caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is important to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning, as we have spoken, and also other cures which we have mentioned in the previous division when the disease is severe and resistant to medication.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If it is a child who does not suffer from medications, then administer purgatives and mild laxatives to cleanse the bowels, doing this every few days, for the benefit of the diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a hot iron as per the previous method, and another cautery on the occipital region of their head, and over any other part of their scalp where you have cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the illness is severe and tolerable, one should apply cautery with cautery tools as mentioned above, having paralyzed and softened the body over the cervical spines and the spinal spines of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the illness is in a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cautery of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick fluid, then apply cautery with the cautery tools mentioned above, having paralyzed them.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that descends into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then it is necessary to drink something that purifies his mind according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, make a cut gently around the wound on the scalp, and then place a bandage over it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And when the patient feels a sudden shiver, they should be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply the ointment, for it is more worthy of consideration than shearing sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire with a tempered heat for a measured time, which causes them to suffer less when placed in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then I want to hold him in the middle of his head in a circular manner and cool it down inside.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And this should be done to the patient once a week, following a strict diet until he is cured; or, if you prefer, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery. This type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then I will place that swollen part in hot water or in a bath of laurel.
Capitol .xii.	**Chapter XII**
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Concerning the treatment of water-related conditions in the foot.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have determined the onset of water in the foot through the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and cause the patient to drink a liquid that purges his head, and keep him from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that immersion in a bath with some herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to shave their head, and use a cautery on that exact spot; and cauterize with two cauteries over the two temples if it is the beginning of water retention in both eyes, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of water retention in one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are leaving the lock; and the cauteries should be at that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be mindful of any bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding, cease the use of any medicine that is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you should have knowledge derived from arteries, amputation of those, and the prevention of bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes, certain parts of the spine are cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing tools, thus producing relief.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	**On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.**
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and frequently occurring, affecting the veins and arteries in the area where they manifest on the head outside, and it is found that this causes excessive fluid discharge, then cauterize that part with a cautery as described at the beginning of this treatise regarding the application of hot water to the eyes, and cauterize the middle part of the head, and use two cauteries at the base of the skull, and two cauteries at the base of each temple, and two cauteries between two bones in the spine.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional need, cauterize that entire area of the eye's coat over the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal fistulas.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating the condition we discussed in the previous section and your medication does not prove effective, prepare a mixture for the patient to drink three times a night; then shave their head and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize the affected area with a pinhead-sized hot iron, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn yourself while performing this procedure.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the method for using the pinhead-sized hot iron.
Capitol .xv.	**Capitulo 15.** 
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	For the softening of the eyelids with a cautery.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to disease or moisture, it is treated with a cautery using this lunar-shaped cautery.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, with a cautery, treat those above the eyebrows, use two small cauteries across, and they should be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third part of the eyelid is adhering.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	With a cautery on the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inside out and insert the cautery into the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are turned inside out so that it stings, cauterization is performed in two ways: either by making a cut or by using a medicinal flame.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient to pull their hairs out, making them long and thin; and if you need to, tie their eyes with a bandage to prevent them from blinking so that the hairs can grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once the hairs have grown back and become thin, place your hand on the patient's eye, close to the eyelid, using a touch that resembles a dead leaf, and start from where the sign begins, near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a cold compress or a mud paste of honey and wheat flour to the affected area.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then light the cautery, which is shaped like this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize along the marked figure, gradually and in small movements, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, appearing as if it were covered with a layer of myrrh.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of the body's healing process is when you notice the eyelid of the affected eye becoming contracted and the skin around the puncture site rising up.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and keep it there for three days, and then apply a warm compress to the area until the swelling has subsided.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cure that will heal it.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery again over the entire area as you had done originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position, sealed, and the hair does not grow back.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The cautery with burning medicine is what you order for the patient to remove the hair so that it does not grow back, and then make a paper-like bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known soap and a live flame, mix these causes together, and make this into a feast so that it is not cooled; expand this from the soap onto the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, place it on one or both eyelids; leave the moistened edge on the eye, and let the patient keep their head in the proper position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And he places this over the medicine and gently presses it, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire within.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as long as the patient feels the bite of the treatment, he should not remove the medicine but apply more with a gentle touch; and when the bite ceases, he should then remove the medicine and wash it with water; and consider whether several times the eyelid has been raised as it is washed, either by heat or incision, for this is the right way; and if it does not return to the application of the medicine on the area where the treatment was not absorbed, do not be discouraged, as your operation will succeed and the wound will close.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then apply pressure around the edge until the adhesion of the hernia is eliminated, and then treat it with a suitable poultice or other remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation, to be vigilant and careful that no part of the medicine falls from the wound, and if several days later the eyelid becomes inflamed due to hair roots in the wound, then apply your medicine again to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the method of extracting the stone.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the size and shape of a man's heels vary, and therefore your treatment must be tailored accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it is not hidden the path of treatment from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of the fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula using the method we have discussed in the sections on ailments and do not confer with your treatment, then know that you cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place some instrument between their teeth so that they do not move or agitate their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then apply a cold compress or a paste of goose fat or bird down to the patient's chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then shape the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be curved, either in the shape of a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish to withdraw, do so with care.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, those who are experienced may find the cold method better for their work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the hernia is open, press it shut and clean and dry the area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the hernia from within.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the hot cautery on it, but first take your hand away from the cold part of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and apply the cautery to the roots of the hair and burn them.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus, if at the beginning of the hot cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in that way for three days, then apply a compress and surround it with an anti-inflammatory ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and cut as appropriate according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first mentioned: enter the place of the fistula and burn it, then return your hand to that gentle fissure whose form it has; and pour on it as much molten lead as necessary; hold your hand firmly in good restraint, so that the patient's pain is not increased, so that the molten lead does not reach the smell of the wound; and be sure to place over the patient's wound a cloth soaked in honey or water, for the lead will adhere to the place of the fistula and heal it by miraculous means.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a nasal draught and reduce the fistula into the body according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of the Gouty Ulcer**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motas visible cause cracks in the lips, especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	If you treat those cracks as we have described in the previous sections but do not benefit from your treatment, then apply a small piece of hot cautery or a knife according to this form that I will show:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the cavity of it according to the thickness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then carefully press that instrument into the cracks until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cover that with a poultice until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When examining the uvula, palate, or gaps between teeth, if an abscess forms and it breaks open, becomes old, and creates a fistula, and you attempt to treat it but do not achieve healing, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and insert that burning iron into the opening of the fistula, allowing your hand to guide the hot iron to its target, doing this once or twice; and subsequently apply the treatment methods we have discussed for healing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the health is completely lost and healing occurs, then it is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as discussed in its respective chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are weakened, and these conditions do not improve with medication, then place the patient's head in a low position, and apply a cautery in the shape that will most closely fit the tooth, so that when you place your finger on the tooth and insert the ignited cautery swiftly, it holds the tooth just slightly longer than necessary for the patient to feel the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, thus achieving its removal.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient gargle with a solution of salt water for an hour, after which he should spit it out, as the weakened tooth is now firm, the softened gum tissue is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is a frostbite or swelling, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization should be performed in two manners: either with cow's dung cautery, or with fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow's dung involves taking the dung and forming it into a ball, then placing it over the heated end of a metal instrument, and applying this to the affected tooth while gently pressing until it is numbed by the cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or something similar in the hot water on that side, place it over the aching tooth, and keep it there until the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization should only be done with care in case of erysipelas or an open wound, and it should not be too harsh so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as necessary, place it over the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times because the pain might return either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth widely and holds the cautery for about an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have seen fit according to your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of extrophules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophules are filled with fluid and humors that are not obedient to digestion due to medicines, and you want to digest them slightly, then apply the cautery directly following its shape, having two open ends so that smoke comes out from one end while you apply heat to the other, over and over again, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying heat over the wound edge until the affected area is healed by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then attend to that wound with ointment and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the catheter or pointed cautery should be conveyed in this way.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of veins and constriction of arteries.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the pleural membrane of the lung, especially when it is caused by a cold chills, one must evacuate that illness at the onset with medicinal emollients, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to burn the pleura with the cautery or to inflame the patient's chest, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that joint or other joints with a hot iron over the collar of the spine in its last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The hot iron should be clamped in the manner described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully tend to that, as described above, until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung and chest ailments.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung ailments are caused by excessive moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and the ailment is long-standing, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with hot irons over the furcula (the area between the shoulder blades) where the lungs tremble and rise; and another at the midsection of the foot, between the two mammillary regions. The iron should be clamped in the manner described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make punctures within these; and then take care of that as it is preceded to be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three prongs, for cauterization is done to that in this way: at one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of titlic, which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stop during its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it is in its usual place, and with a slight movement, it should be placed back as we have testified; at first, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or side; and raise the leg that was initially affected inside the titlic to above the level of the heart, if the joint is dislocated inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two ends; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will appear when using two-ended cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so it becomes subtle according to the amount of time; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this rule, and these are the cauterizations (eight).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in a quiet position, and do not move the limb for any duration until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then cauterization is done over the muscle with a hot iron cautery or with pointed metal cauteries, because the joint is stabilized, the swelling is reduced, and the pain is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is an inflammation in the stomach and it fills with fluid that protrudes from its opening, and if the treatment methods are not changed, the patient will feel the illness on their back, extending their hands and legs, and cauterize that area with three cautery marks: one leaving a mark on the foot the size of a finger, and two others on either side of the back cost, forming a triangular cautery figure; and between those that are not properly aligned, they will cause putrefaction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. If you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, forming this shape; and this should be a circular cautery, following this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it at the point that causes fear: and you know the depth of the puncture in the stomach according to the amount you want to try, and then cauterize that with a cautery on the points; and then treat that with care according to the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of varicose veins.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein is caused by cold, or moisture, or strong wind, and it deviates from its normal course due to excessive outflow, then treat the illness with what we have mentioned, but do not apply pressure, because the illness must be lifted over its base; and know at once three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity: make incisions on the vein below the hipbone, which brings about a man's reclining position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not be impatient with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of liquid that is absorbed corresponds to the degree of specificity of the condition of the vein, and it is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the malady stands on the patient's feet; or if it does not stand there, then it should be sitting, which has already spread out its parts and raised its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn excessively during cauterization, and fix the gaze of your whole body so that all the body is tightened and reaches within the hernias, because here the hernia is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you wish to know whether it is within the muscle or around it, if it is within the muscle, the patient experiences greater gravity of the illness and intensification of pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is around the muscle, because the pain is severe and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is towards you; then identify the location of the affected area; and apply the pointed cautery, which resembles a comb, whose shape was previously described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with these cauteries until the entire wound is healed, so that it reaches the bone, and until the inflammation subsides.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other apoplexes until they are cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And know that among these forms of cautery, only those which are taught in the art of medicine and most of which have been proven to alleviate ailments should be used; however, on some occasions, this may be daring for this operation, but it is better to follow those methods which have been tested over time.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cautery techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin cut end of an aristology tool and inserting it into a dry, narrow opening, corresponding to the size of the said tool.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that in oil and heat it, and cauterize with a cautery tool at the location between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone; place two small cauteries beneath guiding them slightly downwards towards the armpit, and two cauteries sloping down between the fifth rib and the kidney, slightly downwards towards the back; another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and one over the stomach, and three cauteries at the back parts; and another cautery at the location between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area while the procedure is in progress.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use a hot iron cautery like a ray and ignite it, then apply that to the area between the ribs, in order to achieve that place, so that health may be restored, as we have said regarding the hernia of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	One should not fear this cautery procedure, as accidents may happen in the fisted area where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On cauterization of the melisa (a term that could refer to various parts of the body, context is needed for precision).
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the leg with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your cure, use cautery on it according to three methods, all of which are correct; one is that you make three or four punctures along the length of the leg according to the pattern of the cauterization marks on the foot.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of cauterization is the same manner we have said in the cauterization marks on the foot overall.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand with the cautery; and the illness should be on its side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterization; this is that you ignite the cautery having two directions, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and raise the cord which is at the end of the leg where the patient's pain lies to its correct position.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, by which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, be such that cauterization is done according to the extent of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two instruments, hot and sharp, into that opening where they penetrate the spine from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then attend to the cauterizations so that they do not become gangrenous for too many days, as it is more advantageous than other preceding causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsical conditions.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to dropsical conditions but directly to the infected area.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating a dropsical condition using the methods described above and your treatment is ineffective, it is necessary to apply four cauterizations in the region around the affected area, as well as one cauterization on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the anus, two cauterizations between the spinal columns of the back, and a cauterization directly on the right side of the foot, and yet another cauterization over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And it is appropriate to apply the cauterization gently, so that it does not burn for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the hernia from treatment until after applying the cautery which covers it so that two intentions are added to it and it is celebrated with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery which is used to cauterize the abdomen should be in the form of a key according to the shape of that one which is used to cauterize the back, and it is this one which is used to cauterize the thorax is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and parts (of the body).
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in cold water and become filled with water (or possibly swelling), cauterize the feet over the top of the foot, between the big toe and the little finger, and do not crush it; then raise your hand with the cautery and do not return it completely, for the cold water will seep out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauterizations on both thighs, and on each thing make a hot cautery at the end of the cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauterizations should be according to the length of the thigh: one should be placed on the inner side and the other on the outer side of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii is in Roman numerals, translating to 33)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is caused by heat and moisture within, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, located in the stomach and intestines, that must be addressed through appropriate treatment methods, and sometimes the patient endures painful cauteries to exhibit these virtues. Then one should apply a large cautery over their stomach as previously mentioned regarding the cauterization of the stomach, along with circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtle circulatory channels, or a fine-pointed cautery; and also cauteries over alkalines on large stones, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excessive humidity and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure for a young condition from which one does not stray.
Capitol .xxxiv.	**Capitol .xxxiv.** (Note: The capitalization and numbering system here may not strictly follow modern conventions, but I have maintained the original formatting for consistency with the provided text.)
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When hemorrhoids, either old ones or caused by thick humors or corrupted by humidity, do not heal with the methods mentioned in the previous sections, they can be treated by cauterization using three cautery instruments on the pus-filled area of the spine at the base of the back, and another cautery instrument over the navel for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If it is observed that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach using a large cautery as previously mentioned; also apply a cautery to the intestines with one instrument and another cautery to the patient's navel with a clavicle cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cautery for hernias, one should remove them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove hernias, you use the cautery that is similar to a ray of light.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert that ignited instrument into the hernia you have removed, and keep your hand over the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, you cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply heat to them until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so gently.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the treatment we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by that, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one finds a fistula in nature that is old and corrupt with bad humidity, it is most befitting to attempt its healing with subtle attempts, and then gently apply the quantity according to the depth of the fistula as indicated by the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which the attempt is successful.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the hernia cavity, then pay attention to all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials that caused it are removed from it, and they remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from the body, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting it, or falls into those causes of which there will be remembrance in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, you should cauterize them by applying a hot iron to each ulcer, as is done with the cautery clavo, which helps to remember.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should strongly cauterize them according to a small space, so that there will be three cauterizations in line, and thus they will heal more quickly.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture to the point that the patient cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the urinary passage opening above the bladder; the hair at the base of the penis begins to fall out, and cauterize with a pointed cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; cauterize with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be driven according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When fever and moisture appear, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstrual cycle is disrupted, making it difficult to induce labor. At this point, the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have explained for the vesica; or with two cauteries, one on each side of the back, or with a single cautery in a clava-like shape.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus infiltrates the ankle joint and causes its displacement, leading to prolonged pain in one area compared to the other, it is a sign of the condition's progression.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the affected area of the dislocated ankle should be immobilized with a suitable boot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular with the cautery as you have practiced around the opening; in this way, the opening falls into the middle position within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above has a similar form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inflammation in all parts of the body, and be careful that everything is healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower part of the body, caused by friction and moisture, the illness is treated with the water we have mentioned, and this should not be delayed, when you see that the disease is filled with thick humors, bind them with foul pills or artificial pills or similar; then apply cautery to that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the application of the cautery in that area follows two methods: either with medicinal burning substances or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two scientific methods, one of which involves cauterizing that area on the patient's thigh with three triangular cauterizations in this manner and making sure they are deeply inserted.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some times, cautery may be applied to the middle part of the ankle for four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape is taken in the cauterization of a dislocated ankle, one that is circular and burns away all the edges.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for chronic pain in the ankle, when the pain is persistent and not spread to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is spread to the thigh, then cauterize that place with two cauterizations on the thigh at the spot where you direct the disease that causes the pain; and one cauterization on the shin bone for four days on the inner side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the ankle.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the disease spreads that the pain is in the foot itself, then cauterize here where you see it with three or four or more points if you need to for this.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the disease perceives that the pain is left in the side, then cauterize here with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not end up harming nerves or causing great pain, and thus against the will of the patient, aggravating or restricting them.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen others of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated as the swelling achieves the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and this brings death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And certain wise men spoke of the cauterization of water cautery, of which this is the manner: make it like a circular iron ring whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or somewhat less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, make another third; and let the space between them be the thickness of a night's rest; and those circles should have two parts; and the length of those lines should be one or two nights, and make the edges of the iron rings decently embellished on the circles; this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light it in the fire until it wraps around and sparks, and once it's paused on the part of the water, place the patient on their side with the afflicted area above their thigh.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so, three cauteries should be made around that area at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then, leave it like that for three days; apply a poultice to the wound, keeping it open for too many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my children, we have little experience with this kind of cautery because of the fear of watching it and because few have found those that watch over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	One should make the most severe cauteries for those who suffer greatly, and find the right place for them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The most severe cauteries, as medicines, are such that you make two circles with a perforated armature in which the keyhole of the door is placed; their length on the wall should be equal to the diameter of the keys or something similar.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part; then place cushions on both sides and ensure they hold each other in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the affected area where the patient feels pain in the side, and take some cold water, form it into two circles, and gradually apply heat to it, for a duration of an hour, allowing the patient to endure the burning sensation and adhesion—as if the fire is biting—until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and dry the affected area with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then repeat this process for three days, placing your hand over the affected area until the burning sensation returns to its original intensity, and continue this treatment for several more days, as it is effective in healing. This is the final step in the treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a remedy for that pain until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make them assume a position that retains water as is done in hydrotherapy.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water therapy, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no scarring from both an opening, and after washing them, place in a new container where the opening is left pierced for a small amount to enter inside.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And leave the bottom of the container immersed in another highly concentrated solution, then place them over the alkali and live water mixture with two fingers, and after compressing them well with your hand, let the hot water from the solution descend into the opening left by the other solution in the container.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then carefully adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and a renewable alkali, so that the heat produced will be of great intensity, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, as the operation uses fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medicines are some that are cauterized with wide applications, both quickly and gently, and cause no harm but rather provide benefit.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	A wise man from ancient times describes an operation and cure for the pain of water (edema) and sciatica, and magnanimously proclaims that it is a wonderful thing to have discovered this, and says that no other treatment is needed, as it heals completely with repeated immersion in hot water.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that near a fresh wound, if it is not infected with green (gangrenous) matter, take a recent fig (fig leaf) and tie it tightly to the affected area in water where the pain resides, whether in the foot, or the thigh, or the leg, and let it be.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours or as long as the patient's condition allows for relaxation from tension.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in hot water, and while his body is heated, insert that into the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines unless it is for the removal of harmful substances from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	It is already stated that when the narrow vein of the goat is cauterized, it brings relief; and the cautery should be applied to him in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between his toes and between his bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dry goat's vein, inflame it over fire until it is done, and place it on the wool, leaving the inside to be stretched out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called the "cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as bending or hitting, or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the infusion of foreign, wet material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not apply to any other species, but only to this one which is caused by the infusion of foreign, wet material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, prepare pills that resemble them, which are made over the part where the pain is located in three lines according to its extent, and apply cautery on each line as much as necessary, depending on the severity of the malady and the virtue of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with clavished cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This malady often appears in small children; the sign of its onset in children is that their structure becomes tight in the evening, causing elevation and limited movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last spine of the back and the knots of the spine that begin to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to restrict it, you cauterize it with a circular cautery in this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery across all parts of the spine evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be appropriate between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then take care of the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered to a swelling caused by a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	**Capitol. XXIV.**
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	**On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.**
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout is caused by cold and is not relieved by usual treatments, then the pain should be treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize the immediate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot with pointed cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And apply an olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain increases within the joints or other parts of the body, and this persists, then cauterize each joint with three or four of these olive-shaped cauteries.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, only target the specific part of the joint.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain persists within the joint and spreads, then administer the cautery as we have discussed in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the lower limbs only and is called rheum, then make incisions along the course of the veins as they return, in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these areas, make incisions around the course of the veins on each side and on the nerve root of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain affects various joints or muscles, apply cautery to areas all over the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the illness with improper treatment and medicines, for if proper regimen is followed and the fever is reduced by this cautery, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the start of a new section or chapter in the medical treatise.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the angles and opens hernias against the intestine in the genital region, treatment begins by returning the intestine to its place, and you should order the patient to fast for a day and use gentle means so that the hernia does not return from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue to massage the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his mind at ease so that the hernia or rupture does not reappear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the intestines to their proper place, and gently attempt to reduce the hernia over the bone of the penis, marking the end of which is similar to the shape of a circle in the upper openings of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then apply the cautery in the shape as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which there are many ropes and bands.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery properly, and take care to reach the bone of the toe within the middle of the foot; and repeat that another time if it does not succeed for you at first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the position of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to disturb that hernia, lest it cause death or another great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not apply your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery on children should be gentle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care of the cautery site for three days, applying fresh bandages until the burn crusts over.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be laid on their back for 10 days until the site is sealed and the pain subsides.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that the patient's food intake should be adjusted according to the duration of their healing process, which strengthens their stomach, and that the intestine should not protrude outside due to efforts made to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is deemed appropriate to remove it after approximately ten days, administer a suitable treatment, and continue for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should also reduce hard work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing diligently, they will be healed completely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begin at the commencement, and do not heal, then cauterize the hernia with a red hot iron according to its size, and it is important that what comes out from the abdominal wall be cleaned as if from the third part of the intestine; and take care of that as we have said, and do not allow it to become infected.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Some have previously said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this method, as it is indicated by experience:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that they hold by the width on both sides of the tear, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain is felt in other parts of the body due to sudden impact or accident and that pain persists for a long time without responding to medical treatments, then cauterization with a pointed cautery should be considered.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the type of cautery should be chosen for each member based on its size and depth, as well as the nature and location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the first cautery is successful, stop; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are caused by the injury to a member closest to it, so make sure you get those with cautery before the patient recovers.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes need cauterization due to severe disfigurement, and most often if the type of leprosy is characterized by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you wish to cauterize this, consider whether the leprosy is severe and such that it can be cured by what has been said in the previous division, and not by any other means or treatment, and fear regarding the patient that corruption will spread throughout the body and affect all its parts, then cauterize the head above the affected area: first at the middle of the head, and second below it, extending to the forehead; also on two sides, forming horns, and behind, over the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, with your hand on the cautery, apply it slightly inside where it touches the bone, and remove any excess scabs to prevent further irritation, and cauterize over the affected area as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, you must cauterize those parts with those cauteries that we have mentioned in the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each eye-lid, two cauteries on both shoulders, five cauteries on the spine, one cautery near the coccyx, and one over the hip, and two on each ankle, and one on each foot, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and two on the soles of their feet; cauterize those on all the joints of the hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on their claws.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole, do not irritate those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the colon.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its effectiveness and benefit; and you know that disease does not reside in the cautery, as it does in its parts, for this reason because the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And consider that the size of cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully apply the cautery with flour mixed with honey and other remedies within that it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stunned or asleep and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it is not healed, then you cauterize that stunned member with cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its injury.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your hot cautery enter slightly into the wound of the cord.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment which will heal it.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes, certain cauterizations cause numbness which extends to the most and the feet, and the spinal columns of the back, and the tension of the nerves causes that member to go numb.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not attempt this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of the nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .xlix. (Note: The Roman numeral 'xlix' translates to 49.)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcers that fester.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the blister is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal treatments, then apply a cautery to it with a pre-heated iron according to the quantity of the specific type of scarr within the limit that the whiteness and color of the blister are preserved, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a cure from flour of oats and lentils mixed with warm oil and leaves of arnica, or pigeon's blood or deer's blood, each one a separate component but all mixed together, and apply it as a compress over the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. The term "Capitol .l." does not appear to be a standard phrase in any known language. If this is part of a larger text, providing more context would greatly assist in offering a proper interpretation and translation.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	**De Cauterizacio de Cranc (On the Cauterization of Cramps)**
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it might become ulcerated, and I have already seen this a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more precisely done that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, it may be due to excessive moisture or the patient's condition, as it becomes old and brittle, lacking strength, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around its circumference with multiple small punctate cauterizations; and apply pressure to that area, as it will aid in its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and pause it at the middle place of the softened skin until the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery at that place is left to heal, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and then take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	**Chapter II.**
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	**On the Cauterization of Corroded [Tissues]**
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a progressive corruption in the member that eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosive in a place that requires cauterization with fire, then heat cautery claws, both small and large, as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply the cautery from every direction until you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then bind it for three days, keeping the cauterized areas covered with a mixture of oil every three hours until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with a poultice of warm, moist flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh has healed and there is no corruption, then it is good; otherwise, the cautery should be applied again to the areas that are corrupt.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corruption is treated with certain sharp medicines, as they are half-way between the application of poultices and cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, using a hot cautery over fire is more effective for healing quickly.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already mentioned the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you find it lacking strength.
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter III**
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Procedures
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	You should pay particular attention to the parts around the foot affected by malady, which is called a 'claus' and is often an excruciating, protruding growth, damaging the foot; cauterization on these areas is done in two ways: either with fire or with water-cooled cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The hot cautery with fire should be made with a flame shaped like a serpent's tongue, crafted from iron according to the size of the claus in the wound, and have delicate edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply the heated instrument to the toe, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the toe until it reaches the depth of the toe.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on top of it for one night so that it is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a ointment made from generated animal fat until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not healed and you notice recurring accidents on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then apply these cauterization instruments with water. Take a small glass or iron needle or a turnspit, and apply that to the toe; pour a few drops of water into the glass, and hold your hand over it, rotating the instrument around the toe until the water evaporates from the root of the toe. Wait for the patient's pain to subside for an hour, then remove the water, as the toe will have shed its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they do to these individuals, bringing them close so that all of their parts in the body may be examined.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those wounds whose roots in the joints have been eradicated with these ointments that the flesh regains strength.
Capitol .liiii.	It appears that the text fragment you've provided is simply a page number or a marker, likely from a medieval medical treatise, indicating the beginning of a new section (Capitol .liii.). In this context, it doesn't need a direct translation but rather serves as a guide to navigate the document.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding the cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever due to some other irritant, or similar causes, you should cauterize these with four cautery points or two on each side of the spine, between each spinal bone with a single cautery; and cauterize the foot of the patient, and the stomach with olive-shaped cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of him rests and hastens the health of the afflicted illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidental burns on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When burns on the body break out with pustules formed of corrupt thick matter, at the onset of this appearance, cauterize over all parts of the fistula with a subtle cautery or a hot iron, extending its end to the fire; or cut it off with a sharp blade; or cauterize with a lens.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, too, cauterization is applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not crushed, and the excess matter is broken off, doing away with those, and healing from these.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, be aware that this should be done with an appropriate evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	**Capitol LVI.**  (Chapter 60) 
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flux of blood from a wound by cutting with an arrow.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Wounds that result from arrows that have been cut into the flesh often cause a flow of blood, or it may be due to the onset of boils or cauterization on a limb, and it appears similar, making it difficult to control.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you should use both hands on the wound caused by the arrow and press firmly over it as you slowly raise it until the flow of blood stops completely so that it does not come out again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply hot olive oil cauterization, both small and large, for many wounds, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large amount, according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, applying pressure firmly on that vein as you have raised it, and cauterize it until it is completely blocked and that flow of blood is stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the arteries when you remove the cloth and withdraw the cautery, take another cautery carefully selected from the cauteries that are prepared over the fire, and do not cease to repeat this until the clot is reduced.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not injure the nerves here, which could lead to further harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the clot in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction, where the ends of it are burned and the clot restricted, or tied with thread or ligature for a strong contraction, or paused over it with medicines whose virtue is to constrict the clot; and be tightened with a cushion or compression at the cost.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a proper restriction of it with bandages or by positioning opposing causes and similar ones, offers only temporary relief.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for someone and the doctor or medicine is not present, then open a pause at the said indication over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within so that the blood flow stops from the sovereign departure of the plague, and beyond the arteriary, the aforementioned method should not be repeated; and instead, sprinkle water that is extremely cold on the arteriary until the blood clot hardens and thickens; and then consider what cautery or medicine is required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second step.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incision and perforation, and venesection and phlebotomy, to plagues and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter, we have discussed all illnesses in which heat from cauterization is appropriate and by medicinal combustion, their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for such forms of cautery; I have ordered the chapters on the upper body starting from the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, I will proceed in this manner so that anyone seeking knowledge may find relief, regarding whatever they have asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin, note that this chapter is dedicated to extreme cases where the first chapter on cauterization is not sufficient.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is in great caution that one should be when performing the operation detailed in this chapter, which often leads to blood loss—due to the severing of veins or making an incision on the abscess, or draining pus, or removing arrows, or beginning to set bone—and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And among all these, fear and trembling accompany them, and in most cases, death results from it.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall upon you, for sometimes you must be careful with the ways of men, as they can be contaminated by illness.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is from them that you will learn about their illness, and they must be light-hearted in the face of death; for so violent is the nature of this condition that it finds him in his sickness, and because of its long duration, the sickness itself becomes a cause of death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is of those people that you say, "He has given me health and hope," while their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than your trust and your greed; do not presume any cause for it, but only accept the certain knowledge that confirms it to you, and which has a worthy history behind it.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your ailments the knowledge of diagnosis and indication, for it assists you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, my children, God inspires your understanding and does not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into sections, according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you regarding whatever you inquire about and need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is retained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness manifests itself in children at various times, and when the dark liquid enters the child's head, it affects their life.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes certain conditions must be observed because of a hidden cause that is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This disease is often seen in children, and to all those I have seen die from it, I have observed little benefit from any treatment.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus swollen so much that he could not remove it from his body because of the size of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased within until fire death occurred.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone or it is added beneath the bone on the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the operation is on that part when the humidity is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its breadth, and the length of this fissure should be enough for the humidity to flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity remains between the bones, it is a sign that you should open the entire edges of the head wound and the water will be squeezed out when you press with your hand on those openings inside, which should not be protected.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make incisions in the middle part of the head as follows:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract the incision to remove all humidity; and tighten the cracks with strips and plasters; and on the fifth day, drill holes above them and pour vinegar and oil inside, and loosen the crusts and treat the wound with cauterization and bandages, and hold the head in an equal position; and feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision, which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay close attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and act accordingly as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery, and try to stop the flow of blood and delay the patient's condition due to the flow of blood and the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries close to the auricles, called "hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	**Chapter II:**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When dealing with sudden or severe pain in the ears or feet, and this condition is long-standing and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final cure lies in the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you wish to incise those that the illness has made its head, then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arterioles appear, and tighten firmly the collar of the illness with another cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the places that are most affected, and they remain concealed in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then, with the needle on the arteriole, incise each one carefully where the cut has reached the bone, and do this according to the size of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the needle into the artery after the cut and draw it along the incisions from there.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers, for when a vein is incised, the blood flows out pulsating, which would otherwise escape frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the inflammation does not appear in the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully make an incision and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you need to get from the wound is a quantity of wine one ounce, and read it strongly do not get more or less, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the severity of the illness and the depth of the inflammation in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of infection, you will incise it so that it does not develop gangrene cautely.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen, and take care to cleanse it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From extraction of the tendons which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migraines occur due to atmospheric humidity and the quality of the temples' lacertae (possibly referring to the skin or membranes), or when they are violent and similar to those described in medieval medical texts, and the usual remedies of medicine do not help, then we resort to the extraction of tendons in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those tendons is to address the pain that originates in the temples; understand the visible tendon in the temple, as it is shown by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its severity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the pain with a cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the tendon appears visibly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Then, with the appropriate cut, you open the lock as easily as possible; then turn it around and extract it from the superior parts until you extract the lock from the door and discover that of the tunic, which is left behind, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you wrap it at the end of the finger and cut a single part according to the amount by which the extremities are stretched and contracted, and if they are not incised, the blood will not flow entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then, empty the vein of blood completely; within three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords long, and do not cut it before the plague has healed and allow the blood to flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then you incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; and do this at that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it while the incision is still fresh, and ensure that this work is done in the right place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to work if the patient has a fever or a cold complication; for cauterization is one of the remedies that help reduce moisture, and thus it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the removal of the tendons that have been removed from their original place, and place them properly over it, and treat them with suitable dry medicines to make the flesh and blood flow again as it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another bleed from the tendon occurs, immediately restrict that blood flow, either with cauterization or by filling the space with something, and tighten your hand over it until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those symptoms is not present, hold your tongue over the area until the swelling subsides, and apply cold water with great urgency until the pain ceases, and press as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more commonly extracted from the arrow wound is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have cleansed the two sites, and then apply some fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein is elongated, as it is not stabilized by all this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both edges is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better to have greater sharpness than two edges, because if they are both very sharp, they do not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any inflammation, heat from fire is retained in those areas, and the flesh is slightly separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best of all works and most delicate.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two joints is determined by the thickness of that said part.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic eye pain.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is acidic eye pain, and there are veins in the cornea just above the perforation of the eye, and no medical cause for treatment is found, and the patient's face appears swollen and there is a feeling of ambulation as if crawling like ants, and the eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point that their eyelashes become uncomfortable, and the eyelids are irritated by the sharpness of the tears, old remedies used in the treatment of these conditions, and I will mention this cure as extraordinary.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead equally distanced according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distanced to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids, which are on the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful with the incision of the arteries, which are in two cuts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to apply, it absorbs the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife with its two sharp points, which is the form of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the ribcage, and then make this cut from the first incision to the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strike with this knife in the first incision, another time with another tool called a scissor, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the rib, and along the bone, and use it to reach the middle of the fracture, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appear of the colon, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood decreases, press the places of the frozen parts of the sanction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each fissure something cold like wool, and press upon those powders coated with wine and oil, and it should not develop gangrene cautiously.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then care for it with a mixture of basilic oil or rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text provided is incomplete or missing several lines. The phrase "Capitol .v." does not offer enough context for a meaningful translation without surrounding text. Please provide additional content or clarify the request for a more accurate response.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding from cataracts and the descent of fluids from the head's cavities.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute bleeding occurs and continues, and the patient's wounds exhaust the doctor, their eyelids become ulcerated along with the hair in their sockets, and intense pain is felt in the head's cavities, then it becomes known from this accident that the matter and cataracts do not come from outside but rather from veins originating inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to tilt their head, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin with the incision of the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and pull out your hand from under the cheek's cuts, which are better done after chewing). Make sure the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or cloth, and then repack between the two lips of the cut with new, clean gauze or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then sprinkle on them a dust mixed with wine and oil, so that it does not catch fire dangerously.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen it and see that the abscess has already decreased, then know that you must rub the bone inside that begins in the new flesh, and then apply a dry cure that causes the flesh to shrink, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, creating a paste that is applied to these wounds for the benefit of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI** (assuming this is the heading as per the context)
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	**On the treatment of what cats in the ears.**
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that cats in the ears is one of four species, whether it is a mineral or causes similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or from plants like peas or beans, or fluid-related such as water and wine mixed with them or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when catarrh appears in the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or swell in the ear, and you rest the ear towards the sun, and if the catarrh is drained, it distills into some cause of violable oil or black bile, then promptly administer its extraction, and make the nose blow with a condition, and support the nose to prevent the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then apply some pieces of cloth or wool to the ear canal, and extend the ear away from the body parts, for the moisture thus absorbed is helpful against these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not discharged, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a delicate epicyclic gesture of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is discharged with the gesture, well done; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very delicate instrument with a slight doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and close around the tube with wax and soft oil so that only the tube opens.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the tiest wind with strong attraction, as we have seen with this condition.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot embers or some kind of hot equipment with which the outer part of the limb is gently rubbed, and place that on the tip of the ray, and then wrap it decently around that part.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry the ear from humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if all the causes we have seen are not forgotten, then hold fast to that which prevents the development of gangrene or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting is that at the beginning you make incisions on the affected vein and extract the blood according to its virtue, then do so between your fingers and turn the edge towards the cuts, and make a small gap in the base of the edge where the thickest part of the vein lies.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure is of lunar shape and reaches the skin, and the skin is affected, stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly make the cut at that time and treat it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the inflamed fats that are swollen, then administer treatment and extraction of the pus; but if you do not obey your vision, then take a fine needle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think the part is already moistened by the heat of the aura, place it on heavy weights, and carefully extract it from those places with incisions or subtle gestures, or through incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	If water has entered the ear, which is the cause of the disease at the beginning, and fills his ear to any extent with young wool, then he should throw that ear in water in which a small amount of fire is added, and if by doing so the water is expelled, it is good; otherwise, take some very hot stones and lions according to their length, and heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of those stones into the opening of his ear and jump on it with one foot, striking another stone against the stone that is next to the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already water has been drawn out as you take paper or cloth, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end over the fire until most of it is burned away.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then take another cloth and do this several times until all the water is drawn out, and tear that away from the pipe as it is said of the stone-extracting instrument.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is small, it should be handled gently and treated as we have said in the previous section; however, if it is a large object causing an apparent blockage, then administer the extraction with gestures and scissors, and the cause of it is a foreign body, much lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the previous section and distillation techniques, do not apply your treatment, then guard the ear towards the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with your fingers or some subtle instrument, but if no cause appears, take a tube from narrow to wide whose shape is like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And then insert the very subtle extreme into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the illness; and with a strong suction, suck it out, making movements until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not follow this direction, then close and seal the tube at its circumference with wax as we have said; administer the distills that have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find it described in the treatise on distills.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, using this instrument whose shape is like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make a small, narrow incision, leaving an opening, and place a bandage or cloth tightly over it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus, it is with these procedures that one addresses the concavity of the hernia sac here, which will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the needle and wrap it around the base of the auricle neatly, and then pour oil into the depression, or some herbal juice, or whatever medicine from these remedies you prefer in the lumen — that is in the ear —, and then insert the needle at a slight angle above it and press with your hand to expel the oil into the concavity of the ear and ease the patient's discomfort.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should already be softened with a small amount of heat.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too inflamed, as ear medications do not tolerate excessive inflammation.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear infections.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, children's bellies can become infected without any visible perforation, and this also happens in some adults, either due to an infection or inflammation of the ear tissue, or because of excess skin or tissue around the ear. This infection can sometimes occur inside the ear canal, which is not always noticeable, or it can be external.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And those that occur inside the ear canal, which are not always noticeable, are often the most difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you can see the infection, hold the infected ear towards the light and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if there appears an excess [of fluid], open that thin spatula from which this takes its form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the fluid where the opening is narrow, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two thin edges so as not to harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the meat of the fluid, then take those thin scissors and cut with a sharp ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the root of the ear, take a thin, sharp razor and heat that with a little fire, then gently insert it into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have sensed an obstruction as something that the patient finds easy to pass, due to urgency, apply pressure to ease the obstruction; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a bandage on the wound, according to its size, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the ulcer, or immerse it in water and sprinkle over it, following the third method, and use it; if the ulcer has already formed a crust, be careful not to spoil the water and change it for another water which you wrap in cloth that is either oiled or smooth, until the inflamed part yields; then take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is a discharge of blood, immerse a clean cloth or drape in cold water, place it on the wound, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood, as mentioned in the distillation treatment.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of inflammation affecting the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Moisture which accumulates on the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes is wet, other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So you should have those sharp instruments or scissors, and cut away the hardened matter from their roots, and then place your finger over the incised areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If severe pain flows with hot blood, then you should cauterize those parts with a fine, sharp cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and thoroughly clean them, and when there is no cause for their roots, return them; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Motas seen on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some condition, are characterized by great strength and hardness, and hence are called cataract.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is addition of thick humidity on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation on them considers, when the great size is proceeding from within the part that appears from the eyelid and is destroyed entirely; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore cut along that gap with a knife, and carefully remove it from within entirely while it is still pliable, and then suspend it from above, and separate it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped with the beginning of it, but only penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it will not be noticed due to any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, you will adjust it with a suture; and treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer much because the pain of the wound is restored and healed.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must dig into the surface, raise the eyelid, and suspend the swelling with a bandage, other than what you initially intended, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid itself is enlarged for some reason, this should not be noticed in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat it with medicine until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Regarding the treatment of the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is an inflammation caused by the growth of granules in the eyelids above, and it most often affects children, worsening their vision and leading to severe discomfort; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun due to this, as tears accumulate at these places.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you must apply these to their faces constantly, and while they sleep; and as a result, the eyebrows over their eyelids become moist, covering the swelling that is about to occur; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the acute pain within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a certain method of operation in which the hernia pauses the patient's head on the thigh, and then drapes cloth over it and applies cold; and makes it circular according to the quantity of gas contained from every part, and then places that over the hernial orifice and presses with the fingers throughout so as to add pressure to the middle of the circle, and stops in the middle of that humidification by striking the opening with a spatula according to its size, so that the opening is not larger than the one made in flebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place in the pre-incision cover that you cut through the entire cord until you reach the artery, for in the most appropriate positions of disposition, the artery is closed by fissure according to the shape of the white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those cloth strips that you have wrapped between the parts outside and turn them with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust the fissure, so that the spatula does not reach the wound and tear it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to your spatula at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust the fissure slightly with ease until the spatula proceeds; and then remove those cloth strips that we have mentioned; and subsequently immerse them in water and vinegar and place them over the area and sprinkle those as powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some who bleed stop it by placing something in the cavity of the fissure to prevent what comes from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that which needs to be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an accident occurs in the infected area while using cautery, then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Regarding the tactile examination of the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye, natural growths appear and become antique, these our enemies at the eye cause constant inconvenience in various ways, such as tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissues, until it becomes a cause of the destruction of the eye known as 'tactile injury to the eye', and its cure is done in four ways: either with cautery using fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suture; or through canning, as will be explained.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so take care to place the patient's head in a comfortable position; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where the lid meets the eye, and let the needle pass through the thread from beneath the eyelid, close to the edge where the hairs are, and draw the thread away from its attachment to the eyelid, and turn it towards the inner part of the eye.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then, within the gap between the eyelid and its edge, with a precise movement, cut the hairs using a scalpel or a similar instrument; remove the thread and place it to one side, under the eyelid, using small cotton swabs or cloth; then press firmly on the eyelid with your thumb, creating a slight indentation, as if shaping a pearl.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the shape should be adapted to the amount of swelling in the eyelid; this varies among individuals, as those with more significant swelling require a deeper indentation.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then open the spatula along both lines that you have noted, starting from the lacrimal duct major into the lacrimal duct minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fracture is near the natural hairline, it should also be as thick as a king's crown.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the owl in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it entirely, and adjust the sutures on both lips with glue or thin wool, clean the discharge, and make any excess from the poultice stick to the two eyebrows for certain reasons entwined, if you wish to do so, otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then change the dressing of the poultice every three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the scarification of the sutures, and treat it with what dries and constricts, since the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; tighter sutures are better. Therefore, I tell you about the ancient remedies.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Nevertheless, be diligent in caring for the patient, as it is a good operation and there is nothing to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in examining: one sees on the eyelid a figure like a plum, and then lifts the eyelid at three points, separating and bringing it together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, having the points, and it does not hurt, then take a needle with thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and then insert the other two threads near the lacrimal glands, the first one closer to the larger lacrimal gland, and the second one closer to the smaller one, and adjust between these two threads so they are equal, and then with your hand at an equal elevation, elevate all the eyelid as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the eyelid with stitches, and heal that space once it is cured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs after your incision or wound, cover it with cerum and similar materials, and treat it with fire.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, it occurs on the eyelid where its hairs are turning, so use what we have mentioned about the incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Inserting needles is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have mentioned; then, with an artful hand, insert two needles or two fine threads of which the length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width is adjusted to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each fragment, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Nearby, add any subtleties under what is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of any broken parts with firm tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the inflammation due to tightness will die and be rejected, and it will fall off once it has absorbed itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and treat the infection until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two canals according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capital XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of sharp hair pains in the humid area with an agule when the hair is dense.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp hairs in the humid area that cause pain, the operation on them involves taking a fine needle and pricking that delicate skin in a very specific and careful manner, adjusting the extremities of the hair and not damaging anything else in a very subtle way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needle should be the amount of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then, very carefully, insert another fine needle into it shortly after, adjusting the ends of that one if you so wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a comfortable position, near the sun so that your work may be clearly seen, for it is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it as needed, and make it penetrate the eyelid carefully until you extract it from its natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair from its root and insert that into the oil, taking care that the hairs are one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then gently pull your hand away, removing the hair from the oil and from its natural place in the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the oil is not completely removed from the hair and it remains stuck, reapply the oil to the parts where it has been left, until it comes out easily from the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then examine the wound for its appearance, since you will remove the oil and the dirt, and gently press the wound, leaving the bandage on for two or three days, until the hair attaches to its place and healing begins.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is more broken, you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, making it elevated to that which you see should be elongated closer to some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that occurs on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see the formation of a crater on the eyelid, caused by its contraction when it is drawn to the right or left side, due to poor healing from an infection, incision, or cauterization, and this condition is called leporina (a term possibly related to a hare's ear due to its shape), this crusting or ehacratir can be either natural or accidental, resulting from the healing of an infection, incision, or cautery, or similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you break up that crust and separate the edges of the eyelid, placing a piece of lint or cloth between them, and bind them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out, constrict; for if you do so, only more pus will form and in no time at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use one of those causes that soften it, also soaking in water in which fenugreek seeds have been boiled and mixed with honey, which is liquid and warm, and immerse the affected area in that, and treat it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your healing is that you pierce through every part that is not solidified according to the form in which you first saw it.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but a rectification of the pus that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the care of the eye socket that is done on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This care, which is performed on the eyelid and is commonly called an "almucantare" (or rather, not an almucantare), is of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental almucantare may be caused by a plague, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart from its attachments with the needle and cut with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the eyelid to its natural position if it is healthy; otherwise, take a thread and tie it around the cut in the shape of a figure-eight, and turn the eyelid over that, and make two slits on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of both slits be at two angles of the incision you made, where they meet, and so form an angle within which, when they converge, their figures are complete.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is the Greek letter lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then press the flesh with your finger, as much as the width of the eyelid allows, to close it.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with a thread; also, take care of those areas with the medicines we have mentioned, both mollifying and purgative, until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase the opening by incision or suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the calculus between two eyelids as we have mentioned.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discourse of treatment for increasing or opening, when it is necessary to let it flow during the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, it varies in many ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares various devices, possible within him, to make the figure return to its natural form or close to it, and treats that malady according to what suits him in the operation and with the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, it seems to solidify the eyelid, preventing its normal movement and natural functions, so it is necessary to insert an instrument between the lid and the eyeball, and raise or extend it away from the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you cut through the adhesion with a thin spatula, which is not sharp enough to cause further injury, slightly blunting it so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye's sensitivity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should cut through that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can return to its natural position and all traces of the adhesion are healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put salt water on the eye, which you wash with; or distill steam into it from a sun-heated solution in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with cold water, place a woolen cloth soaked in egg album on the eye, and on the third day use consolidative remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the knowledge of the understanding and prominence of the flesh of the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is according to two manners: either it is nervous, similar to a delicate hard chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen humidity, which when pricked, is easily separated and the point does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species do not begin until the larger eyelid, as it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of operating in the incision of the hernia is that the patient holds their breath, then opens the hernia's orifices, raises the eyelid with your hand, and then grasps the edge of the hernia with your finger after making a slight fold and extending it outward.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the edge of the hernia using a horsehair, or similar material, or a strong thread, duplicating the end of the needle little by little and placing it in the middle of the finger's nail; then penetrate with the needle and tie the thread to the nail; extend it towards the sides and excise the hair from the edge of the nail that is blocking the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you also remove the hair inside the hernia's opening.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you make an incision in the membrane across from the tear duct using a thin spatula or small scissors, and expose the flesh of the natural tear duct to ensure that, with the incision, there will be no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the ungual (finger or toe nail) is attached to the skin so extended or adherent, as we have said, and then it should be carefully extracted with a leech-like instrument of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic on the instrument, lest it rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision is made in the wound, apply a little salt or finely cut silk, and leave it for another day; and then take care that it heals properly.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it deeply embedded in that spot, then look for other remedies to cure this kind of nail; it is healed thus, as well as recomposed in its division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then open the wound of the patient and take a fine, sharp instrument according to this form:
am subtilitat.	With caution.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is hardened and bent and stuck in that position, then it will exude from your body in the form of a clear liquid or a foul-smelling pus or salt water, and you should apply the liquid to the affected area within the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation until all of it that is infected is removed, otherwise, apply a hot cautery to the wound, for if you leave it, the infection will spread and you must treat the beginning of the infection until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that wound until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the lacrimal tissue, if noticed in the wound causing great discomfort, should be suspended immediately; cut it away from that area, but do not close the incision so as to prevent the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the distilled liquid from the main tear duct to clean and heal it.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of scrofula and things that arise from adjusted flesh in the neck.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is born diseased flesh, which is so swollen that it covers the pupil, or pressed close to or drawn back over the eyelids, and strongly pulls them from their sockets, like a bulge in a wall.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation on them is that the disease holds its head in the eye; and then open the eye of that person and collect all the flesh with scissors as is convenient for it, and to this attach either forceps or a basket; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful not to damage the eye, which you must do if you want your operation to succeed.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And make your incision, with which you incise those or remove the splinters that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small forceps with which you carefully extract them according to the shape they take as we will discuss in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle it with powder made from herbs similar to corrosive medicines, and place a clean cloth over the wound until you are certain of no further infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any cause of infection is perceived in the wound and seems to be a serious threat, and you fear further infection, leave the wound open and treat that infection with whatever means necessary, and then repeat the operation until it heals, making sure to take care of the surrounding flesh that may have been affected by this particular wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should always ensure that all danger of infection in the open wound is removed, either by natural means or accidentally, using instruments, and do not put your hand to any of these operations until you see that the member has endured that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Collection of sabres in the warehouse.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabres come in various shapes, some with hardened edges over the warehouse (huel), and prevent access to their operation. The warehouse remains open for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the warehouse where the sabre resides is strong and free from other ailments but only contains sabres, then you should collect that sabre.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on a small pillow, and then suspend those veins with a pin or two, according to your discretion; and let that pin have a subtle, double prong in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two pins gradually in the body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gently squeeze those veins with subtle force, at the right moment, until you see the veins refill with blood and become pulsing.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to let the blood reach the ends of the incision; and if your operation is in the morning, facing the sun, be very firm in your operation, cutting only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, pour the warm or cold distillate onto the wound to corrode any remaining debris from the saw.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If you are unable to collect all of it at that time, then apply a poultice to it, which will alleviate the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is no risk of infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the process according to the patient's condition until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of elevated nasal bones.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat elevated bones with cautery or sharp medicine, as is preceded by the narrative of their condition and it is not cured, then no skill is involved in them; instead, you make incisions over the swelling, waiting for its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within it, until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then you clean it with an instrument whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an instrument with a sharp point, and it is made to cut, and the head is rounded so that it can be punctured by lime or alkali through a fine puncture (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then gently turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This is done at times, and then the place is restored using drying and astringent agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh in it, and the body is separated from the sound and healthy for 40 days, and it is not renewed or inflamed and no further harm occurs to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If that is not the case, then it is only to reduce the fissure to its natural form, and according to this manner: and this is that you uncover according to the bone with a sharp instrument or medicine, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold in this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular in shape, and first extend the rod of the instrument within the extremity thusly as you repeat this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, specifically the area near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little and turn your hand so that it penetrates all through the bone, and you will feel the pain as you apply pressure, which makes the patient wince.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you will now restore the area using astringent medicines that have been prepared.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh is no longer inflamed, the material that had escaped into the outside parts returns to the cavity, hence this is considered a lighter stage of the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the bulge of the hernia.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and does not occur in a painful or unpleasant manner, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then continue with the following steps: make incisions in the neck for drainage and apply suction for better extraction; then apply a liniment made of aloe, fennel, and other herbs over the hernia, and finally, strengthen the bandage over the area using powdery materials.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powdery materials is that you take linen cloth with a coarse texture, cut each piece into four parts, and make them into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity of hernia that the patient has.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And tighten them with a strong, hard cloth; repeat the suction with the blowers for better extraction; then remove the blowers and leave the hernia compressed during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And, at the appropriate times during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, which is good, or otherwise, repeat the application of poultices, compression, and suction until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the choroid tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When a disruption occurs in the choroid tunic, and it is prominent and you proceed to remove the eyelids with some pressure, shaping them as you do for this purpose, and wish to make an incision, the operation on it is done as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea starting from below its attachment, and then place another needle through which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the site where the double thread is located and lift that portion of the uvea around the needle, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in honey and leave until the thread falls from the wool.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then apply the humid wool to it, which will comfort it until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from all parts, around the entire circumference of the wound, a great eminence is formed, and then it is pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, allowing the white humid fluid to flow out, and the wound is dressed and left for some time.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of eyes.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alconati is not, as it seems, a healthy condition that descends like water; it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The manner of working with this condition is to seize it firmly on the affected side and right, then take hold of its head in both of your hands from either side, and stop that which you see approaching from within, and prevent it from descending; thus, light will remain, and the illness will thus perceive its causes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If, however, the descent of the illness is not prepared with what we have said, then seize it between your hands and take a fine, sharp tool to that place over the panniculus, just behind the conjunctiva (in the area desired), until it expels the water.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is removed, you distill the warm water mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured as well as the other causes, as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water coming from the knee.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in division and what is suitable to drill into the wound, depending on its condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must remove the patient's clothes between your hands on a couch and tie their limbs tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand near the patient's eye, if the water-bearing humor is on the left side, use your left hand; or if it is on the right side, use your right hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand if the swelling is on the left side; or take your left hand if the swelling is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then hold the end of the swelling close to the edge of the eyelid for the thickness of the membrane in the region of the lacrimal gland, and gently press the swelling with your hand as you turn it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate the membrane of the eyelid, and feel that the swelling has already been pushed forward due to pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it should be noted that the measurement of the path of the swelling to the point where it touches the edge of the black circle (the pupil) within the boundary of the white part of the eye (the cornea), is the same as the width of the pupil itself; for you will see the pupil through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the magic within the area where the water is, and throw it down once, then another, and so the water descends, and you will see the malady over which his sight falls first, and mix it with its own.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will rest again before casting the magic.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it has evaporated and does not descend, then extract the magic with ease, turn your hand a little by little, and dissolve a small piece of clear salt gem in the water inside and wash that part deeply; and then remove the swollen or stopped or woolen bandage soaked in rose oil and white of egg and apply it to the afflicted part.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But as for us and those of our time, we do not rely on such things as the white of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your alchemy in the insertion of the hul (hernia) due to its hardness - it is one of the men whose hulk is hard -, then know that you must take the sponge which is called 'alberid' in shape of which this is:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce that particular joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and make sure you create a subtle opening for the alchemy.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the alchemy as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's comfortable sleep in a dark room where they sleep on their back at home, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And hold it in such a way that its nature is calm, and do not force your head to the right or left from its natural position.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And arrange the ligament according to its position within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then, in that dark manner, he expels the evil sight and perceives some causes, and returns the ligament within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover this during the hour of treatment or, perhaps, apply an infusion afterwards.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You should know that this is done because the water can suddenly and violently break through due to great pressure.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess forms after cauterization, know that you should open the wound and drain it on the seventh day, and correct any deviated blood flow.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should examine the patient's condition and focus on the face where the problem originated, leaving it untreated for several days, existing in that dark state.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually lower yourself into that position while discussing its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from seeing certain things, and now you should be daring with regard to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already discovered some of those who are in the art, and one said to make a fire in the air with a certain instrument through which water is drawn out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you should not think that what I am about to describe has ever been seen in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it may be a novelty.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices of magic that are above those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the acute end also has that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	**Chapter XXIV**
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are diverse carnal growths adjusted together, of which some cause is akin to a cluster of foot-roots or a nasal polyp; this malady is called polypus because it resembles that very nose (or "peas" - likely a typographical error for "nose").
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, blue-grey in color; and of it is the flesh of a lion, not of a grey hue.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must sever the malady between your fingers and place it in the sun, and dry the nose of it, and pierce the small point onto those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract it from outside the orifice, and then divide what you have understood from those by a delicate spatula from one partition to another, knowing that all the flesh is held; if any cause is found of which the dissection is possible, then quickly do this with one of the delicate instruments at hand as long as there is no other cause involved.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is an infected or acute abscess, then apply it to what it covers; but if it is a malignant abscess, then cut and cauterize it until the abscess is drained and all cavities are healed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then carefully get into the nose with the incision tool, applying either water or oil.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is open and you find humidity process within the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside him there is flesh, nothing but bones of the nose to which no amputation has been performed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you will understand that you insert the instrument into him where there is any abnormality, and it moves in him with smooth motions, and you stop between each joint the amount of the said instrument or less, and then place the illness and insert one end of the instrument into his nose either by force or for other reasons possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this is done, it releases its odor within so that it reaches the nasal canals, and it should be held over their throat, for many times these actions have been observed in schools, and it is a slight cause for those who want to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the instrument, one end emerging from the nose and the other penetrating into the nose, and apply pressure to the flesh around the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh is seated on the edges of the instrument.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the gallbladder, place it in a container with a mixture of salt and vinegar, and do this for three days or more until the glue corrupts everything that is soft in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, after the condition has resolved, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If these remedies come to an end, use them.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the cleansing instrument that distills oils and medicines from the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small, open lamp with a small cavity, and insert something resembling it.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube with a cane, and the tube of the cleansing instrument opener should be flat, uncovered; it should have a handle at the end, which you hold when you suck oil or water from the substances or causes that need to be drawn out.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these herbs are precious: prepare a mixture of castor oil, white balsam, ginger, and safron piletre, long pepper, hawthorn, and epithym (spice) in wine, add some beetroot and kelp juice, make pills from it, and take one pill with warm water three times a day, applied to the affected parts.
Capitol .xxv.	It appears that your message includes a reference to a chapter or section, "Capitol .xxv.", but the text itself is missing. For context, "Capitol" likely refers to a chapter in a book or a section of a document. To assist you effectively, I would need the actual content of the "Capitol .xxv." for translation or analysis.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the roots arise in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Motas (small masses) are seen as roots in the extremities of the nose, and they swell and increase in size over some days until the attention of them is required.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its incision is delayed and it has swelled up, consider if it is soft, hard, of a dark color, and lacks feeling; then do not touch it with a hot iron, for roots seen at this place indicate great evil to the one on whom they are located.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a bright red color and not dark, sometimes it is possible to incise it entirely, evacuate the infection, and cut through the surrounding area until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Chapter XXVI**
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when continuity is broken in one of these cartilages, little benefit is derived from the operation except in certain cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any of these conditions for whatever reason, and it appears as fresh infection with discharge, consider it a plague, adjust the two edges of the infected area with suture, and take care of it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you must extract each part from its connection until it does not bleed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two openings of the wound to stitching and strengthening them; sprinkle dried dragon's blood on them, then place a piece of clean, fine cloth or some other consolidative plaster over it, leaving it for two or three days. Remove that plaster, replace it with another, and keep doing so until the wound is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of the suture is that you add the solution for continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution to the continuity with thread in such a way that it becomes known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	To extract those causes that come in both cheeks inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	These swellings are often found in many people inside their cheeks; some are hard like dense fat from erysipelas, and others are larger or smaller.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, he will open the cheeks and remove each of those hard swellings from every part, and then fill the area with a clean thread while ensuring the wound is restrained. Then, he will wash it with wine and treat the place with water that has been distilled, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the removal of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Remove the swellings that are found above the attached gum tissue, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, he should suspend it using hooks or hold it with forceps and cut it along its root, allowing the healthy blood to flow and the wound to heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a poultice or other stimulatory or purgative powders to the affected area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, you should cut it secondarily and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter XXIX**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for toothache.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth within and between the gums there are rough, hard, and some blackened cuts, which turn red or green due to corruption affecting the gum, and the adjacent teeth are also affected.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should clean the patient between their thighs, hold their head in a certain position, and extract the teeth in which these cuts and similar debris are present, as long as no other cause prevents it, and do this to remove the blackness and redness and other conditions until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is something that occurs at the beginning of reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those things on the other days and the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth have required various forms and shapes of cutting according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the scissors with which the tooth is extracted from its place are different from the scissors used to shave between the teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of scissors must be prepared that you will see soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and spend time in its complete eradication, for there is no substitute cause that alleviates its appearance once it is eradicated, as it is a sublime substance in the process of its eradication.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	If the disease forces you to extract a tooth, it is essential that you are certain which tooth causes the pain, as false indications may lead you to believe that the pain comes from another part of the body or a healthy tooth; therefore, you should extract that one and, once eradicated, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is also extracted, as we have seen this in barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful and understand that it knows best, you should sacrifice the circulation of the tooth using a spoon or any other instrument with some force, until it is completely detached from the gingiva, and then, slowly but surely, cut it away using your hands or fine scissors until it falls out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply strong, large tools for good speech or sharp objects, hold the patient's head between your hands so that it does not hurt, and treat the tooth according to its straightness in a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if this is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it into the affected area with ease and effort, so that the removal happens as it did at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or rotten, then you must wrap that part of the cloth around it tightly with a thin, sharp thread so that it does not come loose during your strain when holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification precisely in all parts of the gumline, and take care not to break or tear it, and then return to the patient for further treatment if the pain is greater than the first.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity when dealing with it, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for the excrescences that appear on men's bodies are great and difficult to remove, and their roots completely uprooted, or sometimes only partially, or extracted from some bones of the jaw, as we have witnessed with repeated occurrences.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the eradication should be washed with vinegar or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of pus, as with repeated occurrences, then some quantity of egg should be applied and washed over the plague, and if that egg does not confer benefit, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be subtle, suitable for extracting a tooth at its beginning, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when used in such cases.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so there are certain large instruments that, when you first use them, as long as they are not bent, their ends should be carefully extracted.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	These are instruments made of Indian steel with straight ends; at the ends of these there are teeth that interlock with one another and emerge from a tight constriction, and sometimes the ends of those instruments have the form of the beak of a bird called a woodpecker, which is very sharp.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter XXXI** (assuming this is the roman numeral notation for the chapter) is missing the actual text content. Without the accompanying medical treatise, I cannot provide a translation for this specific section. If you have more text from the treatise, I'd be happy to assist with translating it.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	**Eradication of teeth and removal of broken bones from the jaw.**
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is lodged for any reason, you should place your fingers over the area and apply pressure for one or two days until the area is softened; then insert some pliers or tongs with their ends shaped like the beak of a woodpecker (ciconia) or a crowbar (guanta), which is the form of a pair of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their bodies are treated within this way with lime or alga.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions with these forceps or hold them, then know that you must lie down on your side and discover all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And the thickness of the small end should be slightly smaller, so that it is not obstructed.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the incision is not correctly made, this one; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular with a thick end:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a more subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And they already help with this instrument having two slopes of which this one has the appropriate form as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments that are used for tooth extraction; because it is done with this instrument which resembles a large claw, and its shape is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	from the triangular end, either curved or straight, which is of some thickness, and not obscured so that it is not distorted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you also know that the instruments for moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisan in this art finds, by himself, according to what the operation means and diverse ailments, for there are ailments to which the ancients did not give name or pause with their instruments due to their various forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is broken, then apply its appropriate weight at that place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for the extraction of teeth, and assist with the gesture which this figure demonstrates.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any swelling, little by little, and it is squeezed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or burst until the bone is completely extracted, then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that of this fracture and its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capital .XXXII.** (Note: The absence of text after "XXXII" suggests this is a heading or section marker rather than content.)
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	**On the treatment of prominent teeth among others.**
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent beyond their natural socket due to caries or especially in women, and most particularly in the sacred parts, then take care to consider: if one tooth is not properly attached to another and it is impossible to clean or pull it, root out that tooth; but if it is not joined to any other tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision with the instrument you use to cut that tooth, which should be done over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure it is not connected to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed and requires filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel in the shape of this.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be of Indian steel with a precise edge; and it should have fine, sharp points like needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or infected.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then cut those at the end, and quickly sever them with some scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If it is a tooth that is causing the pain and it affects the tongue, you must then cut into the space where the aching from this fracture is trapped and stuck, and press on it so that the tongue does not get hurt or the speech corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Capital XXXIII.** (Note: This appears to be a section or chapter marker, not a direct translation.)
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by a strong blow or removal due to impact or breakage, and the pain cannot be relieved by usual remedies, consider using gold wire instead of silver for tightening, as silver becomes weak over time, whereas gold remains unchanged forever.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is to take the thread and draw it twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then increase its curvature in two bends towards the sound tooth of the other half, or if there is one or several knots, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the tension you apply to tighten the thread must be such that it does not pull out the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess thread using pincers or scissors, and insert them in various places with dexterity, and twist them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then tighten it thusly as in Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another strap in such a manner all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thusly when these ligatures are made:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their proper place in each location and are grown again thusly as we have recompensed, they will be renewed.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this can only be done by skilled artists and sages.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is appropriate to use the bones of a cow, made thusly in the form of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament which is found on the tongue, preventing speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found on the tongue, sometimes seen or inherent to it, and which humans do not naturally have, can be caused accidentally by a plague that has already set in.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the malady, eliminating its existence in the throat; and raise their tongue, and then incise that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is detached from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of the plague, then you apply oil and cut it according to its width until you incise the ligament and dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a wound in the flesh, and do not tear here and cause blood flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the clothing of the incision with warm water or vinegar or clean water; and leave the tongue loose; it is necessary that the patient keep the tongue relaxed during each night so that it does not harden again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of pus, apply vinegar to the area; if the pain is acute, cauterize the area with a hot iron suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cure for other causes as long as it is sanitary.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV. (Note: This appears to be a section header, not a translation.)
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Remove the tongue from the extraction of the ranula.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue becomes infected and appears swollen, preventing its normal function; and since it is very strong, it is magnified within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth wide, facing the sun, and consider the infection.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if it appears as a dark, hard, and numb lump that the patient does not feel, then do not touch that part which is cracked.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white, in which there is moisture, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, and cut it apart; and if you have strong winds during the time of your operation, then hold a hot compress over it, as long as it constricts the wind.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And now, return to your work until it is thoroughly cleansed with water and salt, and tend to the other remedies for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Chapter XXXVI**
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles, and those that occur in the throat, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a throat infection occurs, there are glands that become swollen and gather together, which protrude outward and are known as tonsils, which, when you cure them according to what has been said in the previous section and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and do not touch it with force.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a dark color and the base is thick, do not touch it with force due to the flow of pus; instead, let it mature, and either it will drain on its own or it will break open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radiant, and its texture is subtle, then that one needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is what you consider, in comparison to your operation, if the abscess has rested and been treated with rest or if it has decreased in size; then make an incision against the sun, and place the head of the instrument in the center, opening the mouth of it, and the servant takes hold of the tongue with his fingers, using a delicate tool whose shape is as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or bronze, and be sharp with a delicate blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you hold the tongue with your fingers and show the abscess to your patient, observe the pain in that place, then take this little hook and insert it into the opening, and pull it out as far as possible outside.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, then cut with an instrument of this shape.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the sharp points on each are in the opposite direction, one very acute, made of iron but covered with cloth.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available, then cut with a spatula of this shape: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one incision, then cut the other in this same manner of incision, and apply heat to the patient's wound to drain off any excess water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of pus, drain off the water from the decoction of chamomile or mint leaves and similar things until the flow of pus stops, then take care so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, there are no visible signs, other than swelling or red spots; others have two auricles, and you should incise them as you have been taught in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman suffering from an abscess that was born in her groin, an abscess that tends to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the opening in her groin, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she would have died if more time had passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already torn so much that it had created two openings through which pus could be seen coming out.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So, you should listen to me carefully and follow these steps: remove the abscess with a knife, and discard a significant portion of it; then, incise the one from which you understand the other wound originates; close the opening, and press on the tongue; finally, place the stone over the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut out a large part of it, and there flows only a little blood from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the treatment for that woman is absolutely necessary, and she should begin to drink water immediately, and then consume food, so you should not continue to make incisions on those motas (lesions) for a long time, but rather succeed with successive incisions in the same place, which prolongs the healing process.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply and cauterize the ulcer of the patient, thus adding to it; and then walk and do not wash what God has done for that person right now.
Capitol .xxxvii.	**Capitol .xxxvii.** (Note: The lack of specific content or text makes it impossible to provide a translation for this caption. It seems to be referencing a chapter or section in a medical treatise, but without the actual text, further interpretation is not feasible.)
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the huvela (a term possibly referring to a specific body part or condition), when it becomes infected.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the nose, and it is blocked and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the front part thick and round, then it is called a bump.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Although the treatment may be as we have said in the previous section, and your doctor does not agree, and indeed it is often found that the bump has already formed and is hard, you must then incise the round additions; and if it is of long duration and bloody, of dark color or black, and does not give way to touch, then you must be wary of the incision, for there is fear of worsening the condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the manner I have said regarding its whiteness and length, that you remove the evil and press the tongue of it with an instrument which shapes its form, and then place the new one in its place, and pull down that one and incise it with one of two instruments which are called in the incision of two cuts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert anything that is beyond the natural limit of its addition, for if you insert too much, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, using what we recommended for the incision of two veins, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was afraid of the incision, use skill in the cauterization of it to alleviate their fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is simply sharp knife, and it is important that you hold the head of the patient in place, and press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the live cause, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape this is.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extremity of the patient's body where the medicine is placed should be concave like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of it, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the intrinsic medicine, so as not to cause any harm to the throat of the patient and relaxes that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, and squeeze it onto the uvula until the space in the middle is filled and the swelling is reduced by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the finger, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the finger into the cloth in a channel so that the cloth adheres to the finger, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then clean the cauterization of the uvula with cloth soaked in the medicine around the wound, cleanse it with water, cure it externally with embrocation, and tend to it with gargles until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is both safer and less fearful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times, the uvula is cured by something finer than cautery and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scicados of Arabia, chamomile, broadleaf, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into one bundle, and submerge them in wine, and let them bubble; then let the wave be gently stirred decently, and in the middle part of the wave place a trap, on which is placed an instrument of hard wood according to this manner; it should be made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the tip into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the veil, until the uvula is completely obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process over the affected areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at mealtimes, for it would excessively irritate the appendix, and you should not do that unless you have received a diagnosis of appendicitis from a doctor.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and attach a seal of wax at its end to block the mouth of the hernia, for the wax seal prevents the air from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter" in this context, as it is a common heading in medieval treatises.)
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of splinters and foreign bodies embedded in the skin, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may notice foreign bodies, such as splinters or pebbles, embedded in the skin or mucous membranes due to various causes.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So, when you have removed what is visible from these [foreign bodies], using an instrument placed over the tongue to examine thoroughly within the mouth, you will be able to identify what is in your mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what appears hidden to you in the gullet, be aware that you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause attached to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or let them swallow some piece of nap or shredded lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with yarn, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can take a snake and tie it with yarn, then immerse it in boiling water and extract it; or take a toad and boil it until it is soft and extract its entrails.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If, however, these causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be sharp, about the size of a small nail, and at the end of it, there is a hollow cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's head in bed, and be careful of the pressure on their throat bone, so that he understands what causes him pain, whether it is the bone or the spine, or what the doctor places his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the illness is more severe, it is better to use his knowledge of the location of the cause and apply pressure downwards, and with his hand on the instrument, according to the amount prepared for him, until the pain disappears.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter .xxxix.**
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On extraction of the blood clot attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating the blood clot as described in the previous section, consider the patient's throat under the sun, and remember to clean the tongue with the instrument you have chosen.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that small or subtle clot appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the clot, take a concave needle and insert it into the affected area, then place a heated iron on the concave part of the needle and do this several times (as long as the blood flow stops and the clot is removed from the affected area) and keep the patient well hydrated for the rest of the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a clean cloth filled with water, apply it to the affected area, and wash it; do not suck on it or spill any water, as the blood may soon absorb the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with herbs or use the instruments we mentioned for the smoldering of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls in place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation by suffocation is that you take a cloth with hot coals on it, cover it with a blanket in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument over that hole; then apply the suffocation from above; and ask the patient to open his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffocation is not blown aside until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, for the blood will soon come.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motes again, and prevent the patient from drinking, and make him eat salty foods and herbs, and do not let him drink water, and so it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when seen; it is similar to pincers as well, but with no curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a swallow's beak, which is called a guanta, where it is sharpened with lime, therefore, when we encounter any cause, it does not cease.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on the perception of apophthegm and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apophthegm are special words, in various ways, according to the recollection of their memory, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and section in two ways, of which one is for the special nature of the apophthegm themselves; and for what we understand about humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is specifically the places where bodily accidents occur, where the apophthegm occurring in the head is different from the apophthegm occurring in the foot; and the apophthegm occurring in the fleshy part is different from the apophthegm occurring in the joint; and each of them has its own operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses are such that they do not require puncture but rather the maturation of the health in those or the completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that require drainage when they are infected, and are not matured according to their course, are those that tend to affect joints; for an abscess that is close to a joint will persist as long as you do not drain it, and its corruption weakens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member. Or if the abscess is near a major limb, and you delay draining it after it has matured, it will harm the main limb; or if it is near the anus, then do not drain it until it has matured, for if you perforate it too soon before it has matured, the pus cannot escape and it becomes elongated within the parts of the anus, and a fistula is formed, or it becomes infected at the point of drainage that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You also know the time for draining the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that healing has begun when the pain ceases and fever abates, and there is a reduction in rigidity and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And furthermore, know how to recognize the time for puncture in the area where pus has collected beneath the abscess and from the healing of the protrusion.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The puncture should be made through the thickness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of knots, of nerves, of tendons; and finally, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use puncture according to the affected member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But if the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait until the puncture is confirmed by the passage of pus, as we have said; for if you make the puncture before that, the course of the disease will be prolonged, and it will cause great pain and strong inflammation of the tissues around it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some incisions may be made directly through the skin or according to the thickness of the flesh or body part that needs it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large incisions, make a deep and wide cut or sections as per the diversity of the size of the incisions.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other types of incisions where the skin is to be cut and left open, when made in such a way that it heals like a wound already existing, similar to what happens in cases of double or bubo-like infections.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	Of those that are incised in sections with three angles; and of those where the incision is made like a figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the apostemas of the elbows.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of their kind where a round section and a lunar section are administered, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Make sure those who have no such symptoms of surface inflammation understand that you are making a superficial incision or puncture, not too deep.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the inflammation is severe and has already collected a lot of pus, do not make a deep incision at once; instead, withdraw a portion, then re-incise it the next day, and withdraw a larger portion, repeating this process in stages according to its severity until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And particularly if the patient is in a frail condition, a woman in labor, a small child, or an elderly person, because the animal spirit quickly resolves itself with the exit of pus, and often these patients die from the illness, while you perform the operation on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter: when you make an incision to drain these inflammations, be sure to clean the sores and consider whether the inflammation of the apostema is mild, or if the incision is deep, then administer suitable medications; if the apostema is large, and the incisional wounds are wide, then apply pressure over each wound until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the fascia or tendon is severed in the abscess, then cover it with thin cloth or thread from linen, just as you would cover a wound with bandages, keep it moist; and strengthen that area within three days; and then treat and cure it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If there is a flow of blood during your operation, you should apply clean water and vinegar to it, and place a linen cloth over the area where the bleeding is happening, pressing it gently.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you must administer remedies and treatment as recommended in various parts of this book and according to division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during the winter, and the abscessed area has many nerves, you must apply poultices in hot oil and vinegar, and place them over the affected spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then cover what you place over them with moist poultices of water and oil or wine and oil, and change all of this every third day as we have said, and ensure that you loosen the crust and clean that area and apply what is suitable for its healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of hernias universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned about every hernia in what way it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl. (Forty-first)
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	About the incision of hernias that appear in the groin of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the groin of the head are small hernias, which are of different types and contain membranes that are formed at their edges; these types have distinct names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them spring drops, and those are the ones that contain moisture similar to lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those are the ones that contain moisture similar to sweat, and they resemble them; and those are the ones that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not cause annoying pain.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you expect those with instruments in the shape of which they infiltrate, which is called an entrom, as you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then you divide that as if cutting according to length by sectioning the surface according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Therefore, when moisture is evacuated, you will scrape that part where that moisture was located, and do not leave any cause for that, for troops seen returning from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the affected area in Egyptian niter (a form of potassium nitrate), if present, or in water and salt; fill that with the paste and leave it for another day, as it corrodes everything that breaks through that crust.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then repeat the treatment on that area with Egyptian niter according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that crust; cure the ulcer with niter when it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess forms with fatty nodes, then you will incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have a section that is cut in the shape of a cross, and it gets inserted between two folds of the section and removed from all sides, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains this.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your bowstring causes resistance, then do as I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform in the abscess of the section and treatment as I have told you; the section over the abscessed lapified is lighter because it has little pain and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are these abscesses of which some are in the head on men as well as those on women old and young; which causes it because you must incise an abscess on the head of an elderly woman and drain the abscess thus with a hard, sharp, white stone that cannot be chewed, and if anyone were to touch it, they would be infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other accidental boils on the head, except for this one, which is not covered in this chapter, just as the boils that appear on the heads of children and require shaving the hair, the treatment for all of these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their course so that the matter from the abscess is removed from the deeper parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then take care of those affected as is appropriate for the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collar.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Unexpected outbreaks of these boils occur in the collar, armpits, and angles, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And thus those that occur in the colon, and such motes that are generated among them, all scrofula of those arises from their own tunic, and thus also with nodes and apoplexy of the head, as we have recollected.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are motes; some are stony, others contain moisture, and those that are malicious do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you perceive to be of good disposition upon touching, of which the color is characteristic of the ulcer, and it is worsened at every point, and not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not swollen, you must incise it along the dry superficial surface from its origin within the body to where it leaves the corporeal line G. (a line possibly referring to anatomical regions) in the region of B., and remove it entirely from every part, and extend the edges of the ulcer with onces (small tools), or oncis (maybe a type of tool) if necessary, as we have said regarding nodes on the head; extract that small bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it requires greater caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the knife is not sharp enough to fit in your hand for incision, or if it causes the patient distress or you make an unnecessary incision into a vein or artery, then you will be left with a wound filled with vitriol or other powders that prevent pus from flowing out and clearing the infection, leaving the affected area until the heat of the abscess subsides and the infection is softened, and begins to fester.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until the task is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then carefully examine the aforementioned small lumps, inquiring if any are connected to the others, and if so, make incisions into them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, you must be careful not to cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	You must be careful to open that closed and tightly folded veil, and gently pull it aside so that it does not tear.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with a poultice of warm, Egyptian-style ointment and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you cut the whole scrofula, be careful to close both edges of the wound so that no excessive pus forms above.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you find that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to cut into the root of it, drain it, and then stitch it up and apply the treatment as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the scrofulas that contain humidity, make a perforation with a superficial punct at the place where it appears to you as the site of its formation, and stop the punct from which pus comes from below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the punct, you should find and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the plague is already cleaned, then you cure it with the found substance of living flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pilot of the abscess, cut through the gullet accidentally.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients said this section in the piloth, and we have not seen anyone in our land who does that thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In some men, there is a weakness that requires caution when extracting the stones, for if it is not done quickly, all the veins and major parts of the ailment are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the ailment is not in the intestines, it is necessary to avoid extraction of stones to prevent loss, which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, incise the stones below three circles of the stone's circles, or four with a small section according to the distance between two circles for quantity, that the section is in bone, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, as it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the stone are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must prevent him from extending the cordon of the scrotum too much, and then cut the cordon until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if it be from any other cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then, insert the knife according to what we have recommended; it signifies on the section of the channel for the flame that is from that which is broken and by the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is passed in which perforation is feared, add two flaps of the cordon of the wound, and with that single one, the cartilage is healed.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then, administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of our discussion is to understand that some of these abscesses have already filled up the hollow space of the patient's body, and the illness has spread throughout causing death, and the blood vessels are blocked, and some cut through the epiglotis so that the patient breathes on the site of the disease in some way and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I command that the wound be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; so now I command that the treatment be as follows, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant pressed a sharp object into the patient's throat and cut them in the hollow of their neck, and I was called to treat them, and I perceived the breath of death coming from them, and I uncovered the wound and sought out the source which had come from the infection.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you must confess that you did not cut a vein or guide it, and the wind still blows from the wound, and you treat it until it is healed by fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not be hasty in the treatment if it is not necessary in your voice, and after a few days return for the improvement of your conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the removal of the epiloth (adnexa, e.g., lymph nodes or glands) there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the removal of the apostema (hernia) that occurs outside the gullet, and it is called a hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema (hernia) called hernia of the gullet is a large hernia according to the color of the skin, and it occurs more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it has two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural, it is not possible to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental has two manners: one is similar to node-like masses, and the other manner is apoplexy, which occurs due to the interruption of an artery, and that should be feared.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not prudent to make a diagnosis with a needle unless it is requested.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and investigate that as it is said, and if it appears similar to a nodule and not suspended from any vein, then you cut it out like a node, and extract that which contains the pus from the swelling; otherwise, you should scrutinize his entire body, and pay attention to the area that requires treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capital .45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the removal of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	These nodes have various species, and I have already described all their species in the previous division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important to distinguish between the node and the excrescence, with due caution.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that an excrescence is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of excessiveness subsides; and it is complete putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A node does not exhibit heat, fever, or pain, and it is that cipher lion that is in the body, which is to be extracted.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with vacuum, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fat or lean and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a knot, you must expel it and investigate the beginning of the stirring which is called an "intrusion", according to how its form comes in the chapter most appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the manner of examining abscesses and all knots; you take this stirring and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around that small area little by little until you know that the stirring has already penetrated the knot.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then, with your hand, you close according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and you extract the intrusion and consider what has remained in the trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any colour, then you insert it into the superficial section as I have said in the other appendices.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity present from the previous incision, then you know it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it on the section having no form of cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, raise the section with incisions, carefully extract the cord from every part, and observe the skin or sac, if possible, over it and extract that health from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, repeat attempts accordingly, and carefully extract it from the body before any further damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If, for any reason, either too much or too little, the knot returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that the hernia involves a small part, complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the plague, and place a hot poultice over the one that is abscessed, and treat the other with the appropriate cure until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this that adheres to it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is pulsating against it, or not pulsating, then cut and apply a hot compress at the site of the inflammation that is made of vitriol and let it stay tight for two days or three until the plague subsides and the swelling of the sanch (vein) decreases; and then return to incise what is broken off from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for cutting and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, of which some are larger, others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and with precise movements, so that the instrument fits into the incisions.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the practices of the experienced ones, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the healer.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it concerns three spices: one is great, another is medium, and the third is slight.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one great:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one medium:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one slight:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, they are indicated for those suffering from apoplexy, discharge, fistulas, and hernias, so that between those are the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make rounds, thick, lion-like, also with large needles sewn onto them, and they are made of iron or wood or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of lemon wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they prepare the experienced plaster of black pigeon guano, which remember that through these are opened the fistulas in the concavity of which reflections are reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, others medium, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced great plaster of pigeon guano:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced medium plaster of pigeon guano:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the experienced small plaster of pigeon guano:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the plasters are diverse, being made from specific spices. They have a simple curvature and come in three sizes: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from their body's humors, there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are two curves, which have three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curves, which are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single minor curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single rare curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of the body's great curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a half-moon, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small half-moon, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large half-moon has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a half-moon has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a small half-moon has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large half-moon has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a half-moon has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small half-moon has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels which are sharpened and cut through nodules and abscesses, and there are three kinds: one is large, another middle-sized, and a third small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large scalpel form:
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium scalpel form:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small scalpel form:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, while the other ends are not sharp and are not designed to stop in a particular way; rather, they are made to cut through nodules without damaging veins or nerves, and by doing so, cure the disease and provide immediate relief from the pain caused by the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of knives, which are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The method of great magic:
Forma de magda migier:	The method of middle magic:
Forma de magda pauc:	The method of minor magic.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and look like rays from which alcohol is also produced.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the extreme side, there is a hidden point with a spatula, which goes into the inside and outside of the parts, whenever you want, just as often.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between these times during the piercing of the apertures and do not harm the patient, come in three types: great, middle, and minor.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vents through which the flow of blood is interrupted, and there are three kinds; great, medium, and small; their shapes are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of thin, round, or somewhat elongated metal, sharp at one end.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these types of vents should be great, medium, and small, so that by opening them, the flow of blood is interrupted at the right speed in case of need, and they are used when first aid is not sufficient.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using those to interrupt the flow of blood everywhere in the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as on the legs' varicose veins and between the thighs, and on the arms' veins, and the breasts and abdomen, and the genitals, similar to their shape in moist flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes other small instruments are made in the form of scissors to interrupt the flow of blood when performed by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times are performed in circles according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the nipples of certain men become inflamed due to the pressure during sleep, and they become inflamed, and the nipples of women are assembled and hang down.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to treat this, they should incise the affected area with a sharp instrument according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple retracts from its position and is softened by its magnitude, as it should be in women, then cut it in two parts, its pus overflowing, resembling two half-moons, each containing the other's end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line .B. and .G. And then excise the cord connected between the two lips of the lesion, stop the discharge, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders, which are necessary for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision correctly, due to the patient's restlessness or discharge of pus, then fill the wound with a hot corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is broken off from the pus, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On piercing wounds that leave scars.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These scars that remain after wounds are from the nature of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a puss that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those (wounds) that contain humidity, those with humidity should be incised in the lunar section according to this figure: from the line marked .G. to the line marked .B. And once all that is within the wound has been evacuated, you should secure it with a clean bandage and leave it open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage intact and clean with suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the scar from nodules or scrofula is, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have said regarding scrofula generally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague spreads so that it causes gangrene, then apply cautery to it as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks through the skin and the wound is healed, abscesses sometimes form at that site, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: for when the abscess is from an arrow wound, a long one is added to the body; and when you press the abscess, you feel a hissing in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein tends to return to the general condition of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is dangerous, especially on those that are in the joints, and in difficult places, and in most parts of the body; it is very large, therefore be careful that its treatment does not escape you, and one on the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Lay a cloth over that which is affected by inflammation of the orifices of the arterioles, cut in the longitudinal section along the limb; then slice open the section with scissors and expose the arterioles, removing the tunic until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place the needle on that spot and make it penetrate into the other layer, opening the arterioles with a double thread in two places, which causes the patient to urinate from two arterioles located in the thighs.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the place between the two ligaments with a spatula until the inflammation subsides completely, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment where pus is formed until the ligaments fall, and care for that with a suitable poultice until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess from a vein cut, you must have your hand over the place as close to the abscess as possible with your thumb, and insert the needle at that spot, making it penetrate; then wrap the thread in a double knot until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with the proper ligament as I have told you regarding the grape-like ligament on both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might come out, insert the needle into the wound again at a different point, following the entire path of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Next, dry the wound in the middle part where it is most affected, and once it has healed sufficiently, incise the surplus skin, leaving only what is attached to the patient.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the poultice you have prepared with vinegar and oil to it, and administer the treatment that is required, until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the healing of an apostema caused by nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, when an apostema occurs in the rear and in the veins, and it seems to be similar to apostema occurring in the nerves due to their impact or excessive work, or for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And apply the most of it to the areas of the auxiliaries or the foot, or anywhere where the joints are troubled.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, located in its most vital parts, and when it is straightened by violent force, the patient feels a stupor-like suffering from the illness.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an apoplexy affecting the anterior part of the body, and thus the patient is left with a lock (or possibly a paralysis), feeling pain throughout their entire body, but not in the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have this condition in their joints, it does not cover being attacked by iron, as they will naturally develop contraction due to its strength.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One should make a lock with the fingers on the head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a minor abscess, then cut it open with scissors and incise it at its base.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and cut it out, and close it up; and dress the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs from the chest down to the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Indeed, some people experience pain in their abdomens and other parts of the body which are called fungal-like due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is subtle and the head of each is large; and the edges of these are curved, and it is from these that a great deal of pain is derived.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts which were more or less similar, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were reversed and split open, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, cut these off and insert them into the hole in the foot, one weighs 18 uncias, and the other weighs 6 uncias.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the disease is humid, and the color of the lump is white, moist, of subtle size; then cut them with a broad spatula, and they should be cauterized over fire while you observe, so that the section of it is expelled without pain; and if you feel the pain, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is frightened and disturbed, beware of sudden cuts with a knife; then take a fresh, clean cloth, tighten it around that wound in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust the tightness of the thread; so do not cease to tighten the large thread after its cut, until it is completely detached and falls off by itself in its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or worry in its incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut off the bulk of it, and then cauterize that area to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of it until the plague is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to attempt to incise that which is of a dark color, has little sensation, and is well-connected, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now I will come to the remembrance of remedies for this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure for hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons: either through fissures in the abdominal wall over the belly, and from these openings protrude the intestine or hernia, as appropriate for other ruptures; or by swelling due to a flux of blood or wind, as described above; or by tightness of breath constricted within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and protrusion of the intestine (hernia), then the color of the hernia is similar to that of the body; and it is very painful, and appears in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the release of the hernia, you observe the position of that mass which we have described, with greater or lesser variety, and when you press on it, saying that it is concealed, then return; it is very hot to its own place, and it glorifies a great deal the introduction of water and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, you will observe a swelling and it is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it restricted or ruptured.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear as black spots declining in severity.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it festers according to its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is hot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to hard or venous arthritis, or due to gas; then know that you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it has been taught in the chapter where I have spoken about abscesses due to arthritis and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia or a bulge, then you must order the patient to lie on their side and stay extended; then carefully probe around the entire navel area, and command them to rest with their back between your hands over their hips, and wrap a wide spatula around the hernia in the navel area; then extend the extent of the abscess towards the upper parts using a large spoon; and then tie the opening with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you should cut open the abscessed area along its seam and insert your finger into that opening to explore; if it is constricted or held by a ligament, then carefully cut and pull out the hernia and push it back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, then take some oil; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is against your skill or vein, then circle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into the two strong threads and, in a crisscross manner, penetrate the circuit you made around the abscess, which causes it to rupture; then immediately tighten the abscess into four parts using the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you prefer, leave the needles and let the location heal on its own until the flesh is extended and falls off; or cut it when it has loosened and drained, and then care for that with something that cleans the pus until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion from the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover and tighten the abscess as we have said before, dislodge the stone or moisture that you find there, and then care for it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the cure of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have discussed in our classification, the various types of cracks and the methods for their treatment using medicines, it is incorrect to cure them with a sharp tool so as not to cause an ulcer; we have also spoken about the causes of these cracks and the precautions to be taken for their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cracks are in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as cracks located on the breasts or in the groin, and similar parts of the body, especially when they just begin to form.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	However, when it is old and deep, it does not respond to treatment on its own, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has proven effective against it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is as we have said, you should proceed and remove the disease and purge it of black cholera several times, and then bleed that, if a manifest repulsion is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and make sure that the incision covers it; and carefully explore all parts with a good seal to prevent any cause of further complications from arising.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And stop the bleeding, do not open it further, compress the areas, and clean the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at hand from among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it is contrary to you to make a large incision into a vein or an artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then care for the other wound with the proper treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydropic (edematous) conditions.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydropic conditions and their symptoms, as well as the medicinal treatments for each type.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured with iron is nothing but the specific type of altitude, and it is not similar to the use of iron for tympanitis or for hypostatic conditions, which are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this specific type of hydropic tympanitis with medications and do not confirm the improvement, consider this: if the illness has been weakened in the patient or if it is another type of hydropic condition, similar to those affecting the lungs or abdomen, then be cautious not to treat it with iron, for fear of exacerbating it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you find the disease of an exuberant growth and it is nothing but hydropic and not old or young, then the manner of treating it is that you raise the growth between your fingers, and apply pressure to the abdomen with your hand, draining the water from its opening below the pubic bone, and take out pus with a sharp instrument in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	from two sharp parts of long instruments, with an acute end as well as with pus; however, make sure that in their extreme sharpness there is no brief moment of hesitation, so that during the operation on that part, it does not enter into the cavity and you successfully handle it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydropic is from the cavities, for you will find that in sectioning close to the navel, three parts should be separated on each side below, right above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydropics is due to disease of the veins, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three parts.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of the hernia is due to weakness, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And be sure that your section is on the side where the disease wants to go, so as not to cause excessive discharge at that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then thoroughly pierce the hernia with the instrument, enter that section, and place your hand between the hernia and the abdomen, and gently extract it; and if it is of the size of a nut or egg.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the abdomen until the space reaches the desired location, which is where the water lies.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a fine silver pipe; it is made of silver or bronze or iron, and on its lower part there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; its end is cut according to the shape of a plume, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the pipe is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately exert pressure on the instrument, thus evacuating a considerable amount of water in one moment; if you evacuate less than necessary in that moment, strong pain will beset the patient due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or he may suffer death from kidney failure.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	One should evacuate according to the quantity necessary, as per the strength of the pipe and depending on what one understands about the patient's condition, based on the virtue of its pulse and the goodness of its nature.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And when the instrument is removed, retain the water which causes it, because it is often retained by the string which blocks the opening over the patient's chest, and you should perforate that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to remove too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with a burial in sand, followed by a bath and exposure to the sun for a long time; also use drying medicines as long as it heals.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And perform a cautery on the stomach, and the intestines, and then extract the water as I have described above.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XXV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose birth places are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times a child is born with a hole in the abdomen of its mother and the head of the mixture (amniotic sac) is not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the correct position).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should perform an incision into the sac as soon as possible after birth using a delicate and gentle touch in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then one should place a thin leaden clamp over the opening and tie it with thread, and do this for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, it should be done slowly and carefully; then return to the previous position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if the leaden clamp is not properly secured, it is possible that the urine, which flows over the area, will not be prevented from entering this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	If that of which the pain is tight is to be treated with a lead claw, as we have said, for many days until it is relieved.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it is said, which causes these people: he who is born with a deformity of the penis, due to this, the root of the shame is at the base of his organ, so that he cannot urinate inside, until he raises the shame with his hand from below; and it is not hereditary, therefore because of this, the sperm cannot reach its mother according to rectitude, and it becomes a motley disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of operation is that the disease is turned over on its back, and then extend the tip of his penis with your left hand by violent extraction, and cut off the head of the penis at the place of the foreskin with a sharp knife, or whatever you do not make any cuts, so that the middle part of him comes to look like the head of the penis and the pain falls in its proper place as it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation to free the flow of blood, for accidents may occur; hold it firm where it cuts through the vein, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of an albaster (or white, delicate tissue) that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis due to decay and blackening and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Various accidents occur to this albaster on the penis, and it causes an eminence of raw flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, take care to suspend it gently and cut off that part; then place your hand over the exposed area with Egyptian ointment; and afterward, cure it with refined ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the wound is infected, of a bad color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and its treatment.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and one side of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other side is outside, then you must drain the abscess that is inside at the beginning, until it is consolidated; and when you cure the external part, be careful not to tear the foreskin again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And they also occur in the genitals and foreskin, dark and swollen, so you must clean everything that is already discolored and about to rot or rotten; and then apply a line of this mixture made with flour from scorched millet and crushed garlic and pepper.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an end of bleeding, then apply cautery once a month according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cautery is beneficial in two dispositions together, either for bleeding or for a wound when it is corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, then insert a lead tube into the inside of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through that passage.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head (and this adherence does not occur except in that of whom the foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess), then extract with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely liberated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to free them delicately, then extract with a certain spatula from the head of the foreskin and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin, its delicate nature easily perforates it.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis using a subtle knife, which has already been cleaned with water to prevent adherence in the future.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then, once the fracture is healed, apply a cooling treatment within the affected area to ensure its consolidation.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the cure for what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own operation and volition, and done on infants, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the gentlest approach for the sake of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free peoples, since they do not use it in their laws, and only do so because we have acquired by experience, which cause many skilled craftsmen and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and scissors; they use glue for binding and the fingernail for incision.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And having tried all these methods and not finding better relief than with scissors, or bandages, or faithful glue in the operation with the finger, since the wound escapes more easily, the foreskin's cord, consisting of two tunics, is cut off closer to the root, and the inner tunic remains, and it is forced to another incision, certain of pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the operation that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, does not ensure the incision of the end of the male member, as it quickly enters the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, in the operation with the finger, too much force causes damage and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature and often does not require such treatment that it becomes necessary to operate on it, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Concerning the preparation that is made with forks and binding with silk, I have discovered through experience its excellent quality, because the forks are of a proportional incision, thus matching the sharpness that is above with the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand with two sharp points according to a calculation in time, it creates compression of the binding in a form containing all parts of the whip, to which no error can adhere.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understand a little, doing nothing but binding the hernia to its cord only, and letting it enter into the other on the following day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do whatever you can to make that person happy in all ways, according to their understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure to be between their most esteemed preparations, without causing pain; hide the forks in your hand or place the foot down so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the base of the anus, and clean that which has been added to it from impurity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then secure the site marked with a thread using a small piece of second ligament, holding it in place and indicating the location of the ligament left open with good tension, and cut between the two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the anus slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; clean the wound thoroughly, preferably with a small amount of blood mixed with fresh rose oil; place a cloth on it, which has been previously soaked in the mixture, and repeat this process daily until healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities should not all be of the same length and others should be such that the axis of the foot does not remain straight, and the length of both toes is equal to the length of two handbreadths.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Do not make the mistake of purification when you strongly repel the intrinsic code; either entirely or in part, it requires incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, understand that you should extend the one from your hand to your finger in front of the placement of the spot and inscribe it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, extract it with a hook and inscribe that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and they say that it is swollen from the fiery spot, then you should leave it until the inflammation subsides, remove it gently, and inscribe according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, so as not to injure it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that which the plague solidifies from the powders we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the cord on measure, and you obey to the partitions of them, it will not hurt him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And make treatment for that which we have said, so that it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or sand, or impaction or congestion, and resembles those we have mentioned regarding treatment in the chapter on parts.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if urine is not dissolved and its retention due to pressure causes pain in the lower back, then know that the disease is curved over their kidneys.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on their back and stretch their abdomen away from their back, compressing the hernia as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the bladder's neck is constricted, it prevents the expulsion of urine through the urethra, causing it to be retained.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as mentioned above, the cause of the disease should be treated by drawing out the urine with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and very thin, like a lion's claw, with a tube of fine hair similar to a palm and half again long, having a thin cane at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination through that is to take the urine tube and tie it at the end with a string or twine for proper drainage; and insert the tip of the tube into the urethra, cutting off any excess string if necessary, and then quickly insert it into the catheter and fill it with urine. And immediately stretch the bag on both sides and attach it to the body.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make an incision on the hernia over the skin, and open the bladder of the patient and clean it with oil and olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the hernia; and fold the hernia towards the opening of the incision; and push the catheter through it; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and make sure that the hernia is freed from its cause, and do not force it in a different order than this, but insert the meat where there is curvature.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the cord along the thread, little by little, as the urine dries the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Next, extract that one for the cure of urine, use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief again.
Capitol .lix.	**Capital XX. (XX.th chapter)**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder clisterization with forceps and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When it happens in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or there is a severe infection in that area, and you wish to drain water and medicine from that place, then use an instrument called a forceps, and this is how it is done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if at the end of it there is a deafness, it is closed tightly.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And at that time, there are three tools: two of one kind, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there occurs a congestion, which is what is being propelled, and according to its quantity, it accumulates, until some cause throws out humidity from it, which is then thrown away, and when it is expelled, it attracts something, and when it is withdrawn, it leaves behind a residue similar to the pitch that is found on the ship's battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the tip of the pitch into the humidity and throw away that which is being propelled upward from below, for the humidity is thrown into the cavity of the pitch.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the pitch into the opening as we have mentioned in the ring; and push the humidity away from what you are pushing, for that humidity will reach the bladder soon enough, and the illness centers on that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal that is chiselled onto the bladder, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or steel, it should resemble a small feather in shape, and leave a mark inside the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder and move it, applying the humidity you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and bind it tightly between two pieces of strong double thread, and heat that humidity over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystal into the urine.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand over the bladder, pressing down with the humidity still within its folds, so that the urine is fully emptied from the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; pierce it through its entirety; then insert strong thread into those openings, twisting them as needed; and add the circle to hot water or vinegar, so that you retain whatever humidity, odor, or essence you desire.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you insert this instrument into him in the same way as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	**Chapter LXX (60)**
De extraccio de peyra.	**On the Extraction of Stone**
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the classification of stone types and their treatments with medications, as well as the distinction between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, or incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that becomes lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they recount that exposition of the matter in a clear and concise manner.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that the pain generated in the bladder often goes to children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, appearing in that sand; and the disease scratches its own flesh, causing frequent pain, and when treated, it recovers. And these are the reasons for its name.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that disease becomes easier after they have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it is milder because of what is between those (parts).
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose pain is greater and healing is more difficult; and if it is slight, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to arrive at the cure of this condition, we must begin by cleaning the patient's wound with vinegar, which extracts all the opening in their intestines; for sometimes this opening prevents the flow of urine after examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then, taking hold of the hernia near their feet, and positioning and massaging it gently, helps urine to flow down into the bladder, or sometimes it may move from its place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then use the appropriate clamp between their legs, where the patient's legs are placed with things under them, so that the bladder is completely emptied by declining it to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then take hold of it and extract all that is removed.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then cut it as soon as possible over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot catch hold of anything, then cover it with oil the size of a small bean, either from the patient's left hand or a small piece if it is a child, or a larger amount if it is an adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And once the stone is extracted, leave the small bean-sized amount inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that small amount into the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure on that with the small bean-sized amount, and expel it outside from the same place where you extracted it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's legs with their right hand above, and with their other hand to hold the skin at the place where the extraction is being made, below the legs.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a sharp instrument into the opening of which this is the form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It splits into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle of the leg, first on the side of the left thigh; and the incision should be on that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cut is wide and internal narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the stone, not excessively, because strongly holding the said saying that the stone is in the buttock, one forgets the ability.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that there is a stone with angles and edges, making its extraction difficult for this reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it resembles a grain, it is round, and it is made of the lightest material.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the one that has angles and edges, adjust it in the fracture.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your hands over it or tighten it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which is as sharp as a lime, which you tighten over the stone, and do not let go of it; or insert from behind it a subtle instrument with a curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you want to release the pain, cut and strengthen it with hot iron cauterization.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder and cut into it; then insert a small tool inside; and similarly, make them appear as if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very intense, ignorance consists in incising such a great section, which causes harm to the patient due to one of two reasons: either it stops (the pain) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, for this reason the location is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If it is necessary to expel what is inside that is foreign, or if there is a fracture, use forceps within to extract that which is in the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is loosened, soak the area with water and oil, then apply a mixture of mint and camphor until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If a case of plague occurs with abscesses, swelling and corruption, resembling as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and due to this the urination is hindered (and it is known by the expulsion of urine), then one must immediately address this plague and extract that urine, for if it causes the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and opposite all species, what is suitable for it from the treatment until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the stages of treatment, ensure that you cover and adjust both things and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, and its passage is blocked, treatment for this should be sought immediately, as stones treated by this method are often associated with urinary obstruction; already having tried and exhausted all means, take a metal probe, which has this shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular end, sharp, stuck in the flesh.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take hold of the thread, and tie it around the urethra to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the metal probe into the urethra, piercing it until the tip reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, piercing it from both sides until the urine flows freely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand over what is broken off from the stone of the kidney, outside the bladder, as it is squeezed and expelled with urine, and the illness is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason due to a particular condition, then tie a thread around the kidney and another thread on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close the bladder over the kidney between the two bands.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then release the bandage, loosen the frozen blood clot that is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the kidney again, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage on top, because when the thread is loosened, the stone is expelled from the kidney, and the obstruction in the urinary tract returns to its place, causing the illness again.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this, it is necessary when you bind their bowels, that you raise the ligature at the openings of them, or return to its proper place, and tie the wound thus as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in any of those (parts), then the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that women with strong wills are less prone to illness.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a wise woman who reveals her secrets to a doctor unless she is in labor or has a husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third sentence translates to: "Cleanliness is why you do not allow women uncleanly to handle this art, especially the surgical operation with their hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth sentence states: "And the place of incision over the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, so a deep incision is needed, and there is fear regarding that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, you may call for a clean and knowledgeable female surgeon, and they are not hard to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking those, then seek out a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a woman midwife well-versed in the facts of women, or a woman who has herself experienced the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present this one, and command them to do everything you order them to, from the examination of the stone to its beginning. This is because it matters if the woman is a virgin, so ensure they insert their finger in her anus to check for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that, cut it off and then command him to incise on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not yielding, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the patient and feel around on the bladder, for she places her left hand on the bladder and extracts it with due care.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that, carefully cut it away from the horrible part of the bladder to the sides, adding to the force of your virtue so that it reaches that point of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then make an incision on that position corresponding to the shape of the bladder from the root of the thigh to some extent, and ensure the finger is not removed from the bladder by cutting it off.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be slight at first; then insert the ray into that section, and if the bladder is felt, adjust the section according to the amount, knowing how much urine will be released from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the spices of the pear are diverse: for some are small and sharp, others large and bitter, some long and round, and they have thorns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many species there are of it according to what you have mentioned about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to drain the abscess, apply hot glass (or a similar material) to the affected area for an hour until the abscess is discharged, and then return to your operation to remove the pear.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare yourself with the tools mentioned for the removal of the pear in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to drain pus, and you know that the expulsion of pus is from the deep incision, then place powder on the area and use a dusting and compressive movement, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not extract it, for the strong pain will die out in the illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the pain of the wound subsides after a few days and the location becomes accessible, then you return to your operation while ensuring that the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is no more than the accumulation of moisture in the white trunk, which leaves the opening of the generative vessels containing the seed, and it is called the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural sheath that prepares it for the departure of the seed, as if it were another seed; and it is the opening of the generative vessel between the white trunk that we have mentioned, which is not a hernia but rather a tartar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, for these are the areas where this matter is discharged, and sometimes it occurs due to impact on the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it is either declining to citron or bloody, or red, or black and sticky, or white water, and it is that which is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows this addition of water are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining a little in length, with the shape of an egg, and the muscle appears, because the humidity is concentrated from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own fat, then the swelling becomes round and divided from the bone, and thus one estimates that it is another bone.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if moisture is between the joints of the toes and the white skin, then cut away the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the color of the moisture, you should observe the color of the moisture in the cavity where it has formed; and according to what is evident from the trace of the formation, judge what lies within.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of the hernia, you should ensure that the patient is in a reclined position if possible, and turn them over frequently.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then place them on their back for some time, if necessary, and cover them with clean sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then position yourself on the left side of the patient and instruct the helper to follow behind them, extending their finger two hand-widths from the joints of the toes to the edge of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then carefully take a wide and sharp knife, incise along the middle of the cord at the exact place, extending towards the anus.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the second cut according to the same measure, at a distance from the line that you have made through the skin of the genitals, reaching up to the white bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And extract it, observe and be careful not to pierce; your incision should be clean and smooth, examining the extraction carefully according to its quantity and as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then carefully pierce the white bone with a wide perforation and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the bone apart in its divisions; do not touch the cord that connects the genitals, and incise the bone in that manner as much as is possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut through that organ in its entirety or into the pelvis, and especially its thin walls, because if you do not carefully inspect the incision of it, there is a sure risk that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if, during the process of removing that from its place at the time of your operation, you have completed the section of the ciphas, then return inside it, and properly adjust both lips of the hernia from the genitalia with sutures, and likewise take care of it just as you do with other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must ligate the vessels that are above the suspenders, remove the hernia, and take care of it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water is added in two parts, then you know that both are hernias; therefore, cut through that part according to what you have done with the other in the same manner; and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then clean the wound, and enter into the sections with a cloth submerged in oil or olive oil; place another cloth that you have submerged in wine and oil outside, and spread it over both legs and the miracle of the abdomen; and cover it with folded sheets and powders, and wrap those with a linen according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two sheets of linen and wrap them with woolen tape according to this form; press the extremities where it is held by a cloth or woolen tape, add tension in the crotch area of the trousers, one extremity takes up from behind and enters between the two, and the second extremity takes up at the opening of the pant leg, and two other extremities on each thigh and two other extremities on each knee, and all tightness is adjusted in the crotch area of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of cutting; so you take a thin cut-wedge cautery and make an incision at that point of the leg's bone, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white scar tissue containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that cicatrix, and light it until all moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the cicatrix with incisions, and excise it with incisions, and excise it with a subtile cautery ignited; cut according as you can until you eradicate all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is much safer and farther from pus flow, and better than an operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you contrary trouble to use cautery in the time of section or in the time of burns, or pus flow, then hide that you cure what contrary trouble is caused by this, as treatment which you deem suitable for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation because of its terribleness, then perform incision as you have learned; and it is at this point that you, based on what we have said about signs, must be certain that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you understand that you must sever the disease on a raised spot, then make an incision in the lowest part of the abscess with a sharp knife, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And observe the opening widely, so that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area, hold it there, and let the water drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then tend to it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is contrary tension to the flow of water at that moment when you pierce it: this is not done except because the white panniculi in the orifice of the abscess cause opposition and prevent the outflow of water, then you must insert into the abscess a needle or instrument by which water is extracted, whose form precedes; or reduce the tension on the abscess with a small amount.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns, and is retained for about five or six months; and when it is added, then it should be pierced in the same way as before, because the disease will thus pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Hernia Carnosa and its Treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section on this hernia, there is great fear of death in the patient's main dispositions; so it seems to me that its release and salvation are best.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation on those and the spices of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it says that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of them and are caused by various reasons: either by a sudden acute inflammation that is poured into the genera, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not painful in itself, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the very rare abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the compression of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those thus, which has already been perceived as a recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression with your fingers is not advised.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this specific case, incision and removal are made, while on the others, only the outer flesh is cut; you insert the knife into the genitals, then open them, extract the testicle, sever the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and incise the suspensory ligament farther in, after having severed that of every part of the testicle.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the testicle has already been consolidated in those muscles, then you must extract it and make an incision to get it out.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the wound or between the bones, you must carefully remove all that adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the adhesion is caused by native flesh in the location of the adhesion, which is behind, then you must carefully cut all that belongs to it and extract the foreign body as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an apostema (hernia) wrapped by some enveloping similar to a bud and softening of the testes, making it difficult to perform exercise and walk due to the affliction.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious regarding that which precedes its remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I note that they mention operation in that second step which I described first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you must stop the illness on a raised platform; then, gently pull the suspenders of the testicles towards the sides; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hands, extending them with vigor.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then, carefully cut using a sharp knife across the width at the base of the vessels, ensuring that the vessels remain uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And remove completely from every part as I have told you regarding the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double thread into them, fasten that one at the beginning of the place where it hurts, and fasten the other again at the end of their pain.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make incisions in those places in the middle part of the body by cutting deeply according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with a cure for other diseases in which you wish to be free from pain, so that the vessels which cause pain do not remain, as it is not harmful by itself.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then you should remove the testicles or tie them off with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels and that they cease to function, or tie them off so that they do not grow young with these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall that extends over the belly from the blood vessels of the abdomen, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdominal wall or an outgrowth of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movement, shouting, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it is a protrusion entirely within the abdomen as the intestines press against the abdominal cavity.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of the illness is when there is an inflammation of the joint, which at the beginning causes intense pain suddenly; it appears as a different bump near the affected knee, and this is due to the hernia protruding outside the thigh.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the hernia sac is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernial prolapse.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by pressure, and sometimes it runs through the hernia opening, and here it gets stuck, which greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, care must be taken, so as to avoid the risk of aggravating the condition.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of the operation for this condition is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand inside the hernia opening, and then press down on their chest between your hands, while also raising their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the cord that is the cord of the testicles at their attachment, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely through; and fix in two folds of the incised section as you need to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to leave without leaving a gap.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then remove those bodies that are left by the cord of the testicles, ensuring that the white, hard body of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into what is the testicle, between the white body, where the cord has left, and between the second body, and loosen that adherence behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then take hold of the cord of the testicles at the external attachment, and with your left hand extend the white body towards it, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and order the assistant to spread the testicle open, and you dissolve the adherence behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek out the threads that say these are not causes of the intestine wrapped in the hard white ciphe (or, possibly, 'phlegm').
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause within them (the patient's conditions), then turn your attention to the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle with a strong, fine thread of four parts, and insert it through the last (layer) of the phlegm below the cord of the testicles, which is cut; then cut the extremities of the thread that emerge from the phlegm in the shape of a cross; and tie them firmly to each other at one point.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the threads and tie them tightly together so that none of the vessels that nourish these cannot transmit any cause, preventing gangrene from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply another dressing a second time according to the first dressing, at most three days apart; then remove this second dressing from the phallus which holds the tie of the testicles, as much as the size of the tie demands, and cut away all excess material according to its curvature, and leave it in place.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut away the remaining part of the tie below the testicles, cutting from which flows blood and pus as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; leave it on the ulcer; and apply the dressing we have recommended (and sometimes white cautery is used, as we have said, for fear of pus flowing from incisions, because these have been known to cause complications); and leave the dressing until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is severe, then water should be applied as a compress, and it should be left on until the dressing falls off, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cure for the affliction with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Chapter LXVI**
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventous Hernia**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been observed that indicates a successful cure for it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first step is to perform as we have recommended for the hernia, which is to cut the vessels near it with ease and then dry the middle area around the abscess until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the affliction as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation suffered in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, dislocations in the ankles break and protrude as we have said, and this distends the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not mention any cause of hernias at all; and if they do, it is rarely; and it should be treated immediately.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the condition is prolonged, a fissure should be made in the wall within the hernial sac before it protrudes through the abdominal wall; this happens due to the extension of the abdominal wall in the ankles as we have said, which causes the hernia to occur, since the abdominal wall is stretched and weakened and bulges outward.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with a cautery, thus preceded by the description of the condition.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the condition is cured by cutting according to this manner: the malady lies on the back between the thighs, and then the site of the rupture of the prominent aponeuroses is incised along its length according to the quantity, in three parts.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white cord that is beneath the skin until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the prominent site of the cord, and press that against the abdomen's point.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then press the two prominent sites on the end of the cord's ray, and adjust the suture between one another.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then carefully extract the end of the bowstring, without piercing the skin with all its force, nor extending the wound, or any other cause that you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then carefully tend to that in the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the lesions, cleanse them, and restore the ulcer until it is consolidated; for the skin is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not yet healed.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better at this location, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testes is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and careful attention should be paid to it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it becomes necessary for the one who is requested in the treatment of the patient to make the malady lie according to its own nature, and raise all the soft tissues that are softened over the natural tissue; and then fit two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if desired, in the beginning, the excess of the softened tissue can be removed with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the stitches; and then take care for the healing of the other ailments within, so that they are cured and the discharge falls.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembering it in this book, I will speak of it; and the remembrance of it is necessary only through two methods, of which one is so that when a doctor is asked about this condition, he may know its treatment; and the other way is that we ourselves sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young ones, as with horses, donkeys, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by cutting through a fracture.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and pliable so that they can be hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand while they are resolvable and do not appear to be affected by the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration through cutting and fracturing, hold the animal firmly and with your left hand, press down on the cord of its testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then close the incisions, and cut through each of the testicles with a sectioning tool.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then you incise those abscesses that you have opened.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause unnoticed from the side of the brain, but rather the subtle inflammation that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by compression, for strong compression leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then tend to the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an opening in the scrotal sac of testicles, and in that where it appears between two testicles, resembling a woman's vulva with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, the flow of that urine is seen in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a specific difference: indeed, the organ of the woman over the vulva resembles two testes of a man, slightly smaller in size, just outside the body, similar to the hymen of a man and two ovaries.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is because you must understand how to tightly wrap those tissues to stop the emission of that fluid, and then treat them with a remedy for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, of whom urine is seen in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the flesh, when it is severe and arises from natural causes, should be carefully observed; and in some cases, it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as in men and prevails during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, when you have an excess of swelling in your hand or fingers, use your thumb or some tool to puncture it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish the incision with a single cut, especially at the point of penetration, so as to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of that which is under treatment for healing, as it were.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	There may be born flesh is the flesh that is not in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills itself, and strong heat has been felt from outside according to the appearance of a serpent (and for this reason some call it "tailed malady"); therefore it is necessary that we cut it as we cut the limb, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	It appears that you have provided a reference or a heading, but no text to translate. If you provide the content following "Capitol .lxxii.", I would be happy to assist with the translation as requested.
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Treatment of Arthritis.**
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	It is important that the woman's hymen is not pierced or broken.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to some evil preceding it, and it is caused either by an improperly adjusted body part or by a subtle and deep (condition/injury).
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is felt or in the region of the mother, or in the sides, or above the navel, or below it, and it prevents conception and engagement and childbirth, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of it is gained through observation of the mother, if the pregnancy is evident, then it is recommended; but if not evident, then you should seek to know it from your husband or from a wise person.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the intake is through a subtle leak, especially affecting both lips, then cut and rupture that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that it rests on both delicate lips, and then you hold your breath, indicating the moment of both emissions.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman lies on her back, her legs spread apart, and then she squeezes both lips with force until that subtle leak is broken and the intake is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and hemp in oil and apply it to the area, and keep pressure on it for some time so that the incision does not solidify.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the leak is thick and dense, then cover that with a broad spatula or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for a tumor, then suspend it from an angle, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and bandages, adjusted to the patient's wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the plague is not solidified too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer water from the source.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it is healed with the other treatment of consolidation until it is cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes accidents occur in the native state of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is so for gangrene of the legs, to the gangrene of the legs which is in the greatest part, no opposition should be done in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	**Capitol .lxxiii.**
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red botch that occur in the vicinity of a woman's vagina.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are caused by the dilatation of veins within, not unlike those in the rectum that flow continuously; and when hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they become inflamed.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And you have already described the division of these conditions into species and signs, and indicated which receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and itching when in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with fire is not effective.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the lower part of the body over which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And take care that you place the woman in a clean, warm bed and extend her legs with forks or a rough cloth, and insert those into the creases.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle over those parts the flow of the sacred smoke from one of the burning herbs, thus as with oak and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then massage their feet for an hour and place them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the smoke continues to flow, then make a decoction of sumac and of crushed stones and of gravels and similar ones.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster of this over the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the tumor is incised, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or in the juice of artichoke or in the juice of gallnut, make a compress and apply it to the place; then treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Do not touch the harsh ulcer with your fingers; incise it according to what appears to you from the above mentioned description.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket due to an accident in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The occurrence of various types of abscesses happens in the body, as well as cracks and abscesses, ulcers, and swelling, eruptions, festers, bleeding fistulas, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments and their types, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And as you have stated in this treatise about abscesses, which you see in the body when they are caused by health issues, and if you want to know in what manner the operation is performed to remove them.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So, when you consider that the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp, with inflammation and fever, and sometimes there is a red swelling over it, if you do not cut through it, but rather cure it with something that aids in the maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then position the woman on her side on a cushion that has two cushions; she should recline on her back and align her feet at the opening below the abdomen, so that her thighs are spread apart, and place your hands behind her knees, and tie some bandage to it appropriately.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the head of the bed and administer the instrument that opens the womb, the form of which will be appropriate for those conditions that are to be treated.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And be mindful when administering this instrument that you place yourself at the head of the woman, and ensure that nothing from the instrument enters the womb except for the part that is meant to treat the condition and heal the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the size of the womb, be sure to place poultices on the surface of the womb to prevent any entry of instruments into the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And be sure that you hold the twist that runs in the lace instrument above and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the twist until the opening of the main orifice is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears and it is hot and moist, then you must quickly remove the seed from its head with a broad spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And after the stool is evacuated, then you must place in the wound a sponge soaked in warm oil or oil with some styptics; and apply pressure to the section of the colon at the anus of the patient.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pull out the colon and place it on the clean lint, which is soaked in water containing violets.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it is healed in two days with the application of a suitable poultice until it is completely cured.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother and the plague are washed with water and honey, then add water in which the root of iris or the tongue of long philosophy has been boiled, and return to the mixture.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the plague is deeply embedded in an infected wound, you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead following the method we have described above.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to use the breath of life to heal embryos when they deviating from natural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes the beginning of the natural signs of childbirth when she sees the woman experiencing contractions and desires to smell the air; she is distracted by what is happening above her, and hastens the emission of the embryo. Then you will know that this delivery is according to natural form, and is the emission of the child upon his head, or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will see that the mother's belly is compressed so that the embryo eases slightly, and it moves to the second position, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who differs from this practice does so unnaturally and unbelievably, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is before her head and her feet, or one hand of hers is on her breast, or at her hip, or her head and hand are above her belly, or she is strongly bent over her spine, and appears like the unbelievable figures of hers.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For a wise and subtle midwife is necessary in all those cases, and she must guard against errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the figures of those, and what wit is in those so that it is made clear about this and established on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the flow is situated on the head by natural egress, and it is urgent in women, and it occurs in a difficult part, and its virtue is already weakened, then do that cessation, which women have, and evaporate the congestion of it with fennel seed and moist olives.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then insert the meter between their dilated and fractured edges, or rather, that one into her ungual [finger/toe] nail, so as to draw out what is within her of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come down, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fenugreek ground into a paste.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command him, take off the poultice, which is to be replaced and do that sneezing in position; and close his mouth and nose for an hour, so that the passage [of the labor] is not forgotten soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both sides of the wound are forgotten at the beginning, then be sure to reduce them with ease, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a mattress and lift her legs up, then carefully position the mattress over the ground; and ensure the woman does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the cuts are not properly healed and the wound becomes infected, then incise those areas and remove the pus from the wound or secure the body with bandages until it heals, for that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the positioning of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the embryo is on its feet, then gently press those areas, and slowly turn the embryo, and then compress it, and stretch each part little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are situated between the thighs, then command them to expel, and cause them to vomit at the right time, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then return the small wound little by little until it heals in that second natural form, for that will be forgotten with the passing of time.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do what we have recommended, then take moss and dissolved gum, and grind them thoroughly in a mortar with good percussion, and return the liquid to the abdomen of the patient, near the ovary of the woman.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that stop in boiled water, as long as the symptoms improve.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the wounds have healed and become clean, then make him inhale mist from mint and hold that over him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the fumigation for an hour, you should stop it on a pillow, then make them sneeze and expel air from their mouth, take away that air, and press the lower part of their belly gently to release the gas.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The examination of the fact on their hands and their feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fact appears in this manner, you should then insert your hands slowly; the woman should be tilted over her belly, her legs down, and her feet resting on the floor, and she should embrace her body with her arms.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then you should gently press on the belly, gradually extracting what remains in the patient's feet from their claws as they prepare for the final expulsion.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fact does not come out, take the feet and move them vigorously, then gently press on the hip joints slowly until the fact can pass through.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and gradually narrow the opening, and instruct the woman to breathe deeply until the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The fetus is delivered longitudinally through one of the openings made in the mother's side.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use skill to reduce the mother's pain, but if that is not possible, raise the woman and make her twist around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if twisting does not help, place her on her side, and gently shake the parts of her body with a violent concussion, then apply ointments and bandages that you have prepared beforehand from mud and herbs.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the delivery has begun, then assist her on all sides, and carefully study the reduction of pain, then guide the fetus back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press herself until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The expansion of the condition over the colon increases its mass and the fascia around it is twice that of its usual size.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should have her hand on the fetus, then slowly turn it this way and that, which will facilitate the process.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it has been swallowed, then pause over the cone of it where we have recommended oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command him to cough slowly, and when you have done this, make him rest on his side, then command him to turn over, and from there command him to sneeze in that position.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare for the exit of the fetus on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see a fever in the patient according to this manner, consider it, and then you pierce the second one with your finger until it is free from moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the hernia is hanging from the face and neck, then you pierce that of the hernia, so it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then you force the hernia back inside until it is in place, and instruct the woman to buy some vegetables, and if God wills, it will come out easily.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Twin or multiple births.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twin births are common, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and should be rare; however, they may have natural causes, not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And in addition to those, if they multiply, a second one, and are separated by measurement, distinguish those that enter the ligament in the navel of each one, and sometimes they are forgotten as if it were a fact due to natural negligence, and sometimes they are observed as an inexplicable phenomenon as we have described.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, due to their position, and this leads to the situations we have mentioned about non-natural positions, then you should treat them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what must be done with ease and subtlety, and takes her time, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body for the final stage leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some times are measured in units of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and it is already verified that a woman who experiences abortion cannot get pregnant again, while another, completely formed, causes pain due to the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this teaches that in the science of midwifery, they should pay close attention to such a young one resembling this, and therefore be wary of it as much as possible.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the removal of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have discussed in the section on treatment and it does not exit naturally, and you are compelled to use manual extraction, then consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and free from any conditions that could lead to her peril or loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now cover the woman so that she is supported on her side with her head inclined downwards and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The midwife should hold both parts, either supporting them on the side or restraining them to prevent the child from extending during delivery.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucilage of althae and fennel and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife rubs her hand with these oils and mucilages, and gently enters her hand into the mother, and carefully feels for the position of the child within the womb.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this regard: consider then if the child is ready to be delivered headfirst, and hold the catch as it comes out, either at the feet, or the neck, or the mouth, or the soft palate, or the beard, or the furcula (a part of the skeletal system), or in places close to the ribs, or below the hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the illness manifests itself in the patient's feet, it is then located in the toes or in the middle of the soles, or in the sides of the chest.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it should be held with the thumb of the right hand, bending the curve towards the part between the fingers of the left hand, and then insert the finger easily and place the thumb in one of those positions as mentioned, so that it reaches the source of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then it should be placed and held in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, to ensure an equal attraction, without causing any extension according to its normal state.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And consider this entire process, so that the removal of the illness is also facilitated as it is done in other cases when dealing with teeth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And be aware of what is between them, so that the extension is softened; if any part of the illness remains, then the midwife should apply her fingers with oil and insert them carefully and turn them over those parts that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the removal of the fetus is forgotten, then the incisions will be exchanged in the place where the pus is; and do this until all the fetus is removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is positioned opposite the other and cannot be reduced due to the tension of the hernia, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it until it is all removed, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the crotch.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And likewise, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	However, if the head of the fetus is large, or it gets entangled during extraction, or it's at the end of contracted waters, then you should insert between the spines and split the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," which resembles other instruments described in the relevant chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And seemingly, the making of this is of great difficulty by nature: and now you see that it inserts this algimate, or takes up this swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is solidified and constricted, then its fork must be cut open so that the humidity in the foot can be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not contradict observation, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the hernia from the abdomen is apsith or within it is moist, then you must pierce that space through which the moisture in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the condition is above their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction of it towards the mother's opening should also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and foot are compressed, then you must remove that thick cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the abdomen and foot until what is inside flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are stuck and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the mother's mouth is closed, then insert your hand in the opening of the womb, seek for the child's head, and pull it into the mother's mouth, then insert one or two fingers, and turn it until it is inside.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is closed due to swelling caused by the heat, then be careful not to make it worse; instead, you should administer an infusion of greasy humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; also, keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the issue is on their side, try to slice it open if possible; and administer what we have mentioned regarding the live case.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then slice into the flesh, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause inside after the second operation.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have mentioned about the treatment of the wounds that occur from the main cause.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is an occurrence of blood flow, then use strict waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and another time over that fire another pregnancy was attempted, and another dead child was born from it.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It has happened that after a long time an abscess opens in his body; fire breaks out inside, and he begins to shiver with cold.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have often been called upon to cure them, and treated them for a long time, but the plague is not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then stop considering them from some causes of strong attraction, and take one bone out of them, and after a few days another, and another bone; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, you will pursue the plague, extracting from them many bones, the female existing in their thousand dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, correcting them with a small amount of warmth.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be afraid that it is strange, for there is knowledge and aid in it, and the doctor uses his hand for its healing administration.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of the turn which opens the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the strap in which the limbs are bound, whose tightening has two effects on both ends of the foot.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this strap should be made to be neither too tight nor too loose, and it can be made of silk or leather.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each strap should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and their margins on both sides should be one finger wide; their length should be about a palm and a half, and in the middle part of the two straps there should be two fastenings already fixed, whose length is half a palm, and the width of each strap should be such that two fingers can fit between them, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are placed in the mouth of the hernia to keep it open while you apply the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that subtle and light pus is:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of bark or bamboo according to the appearance of tongs.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the extremity of it, two additional items are placed as well, and the length of those additions is about the width of a palm, and the thickness of each is about two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the hernia, you lay the woman on her side with her legs hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument like shears, according to the amount you want from the hernia's mouth, until the mesh does as you wish.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vertigo which the ancients spoke of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that drives the process:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of friendship that contains the great head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps with teeth at the end, thus when using, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, also with teeth like a saw with which it cuts and contains.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of friendship sparingly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook without a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook without two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps with teeth that close in which the head of the child is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A form of spatula with two extremities where the head is separated.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments, when used in combination and with the addition of various spices, prepared as they should be by the artisans, become lighter for their use and more beneficial to humans due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already adequate for your needs, as the necessity of others cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the secondine (a medical term possibly referring to a specific part or procedure).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in a controlled manner, place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe outside, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, take a blade and make a hole in the cover, opening the mother's mouth with herbs such as calendula, chamomile, and licorice root, as well as cinnamon and cassia wood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, keeping it open until the steam enters the mother's cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make the patient sneeze as mentioned earlier, and the second stage will pass quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If one approaches this cure properly and not rashly, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or an infusion of alder, and gently insert it into the patient's anus and seek for the second one, and when she has found it, gradually pull it out bit by bit. If it is attached to the mother's body, then insert her second hand according to our previous discussion, and when she finds the second one, extract it little by little so that the mother does not feel a strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is better to be changed at the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it is also adjusted in the amount of attraction, for she will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with all kinds of herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then be careful not to do anything in the process of abstraction, but know that what has passed from him into the mother's womb lies in the matter of the woman, and immediately sprinkle it with a mixture of herbs and four drugs; for it will rot within a few days and dissolve and disappear.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you perceive that there is a high sound in the head and stomach, which causes the patient pain, then know that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients already used fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and postnatal bleeding:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to make a cut or an incision.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the wide end over the fire, and the suction should be applied over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the suction is consumed, then repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the cure for the unperforated anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children have this problem, and their anuses are not perforated, which is already a delicate and sensitive issue.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to perforate it as she has said, or otherwise, to use a sharp instrument and ensure it does not touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully tend to that mixture until it becomes peaceful.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a fear of oppression, then apply pressure to the tract through a catheter for several days, and stop it when the child wants to pass stool.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that oppression occurs in the anus due to the formation of a fistula or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with the same methods we have mentioned for healing and bandaging.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the healing of fistulas that inevitably occur.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that inevitably form in the perineum contain foul-smelling and thick discharge, which either protrude outside or are located in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or an ulcer.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that condition is chronic and caused by stagnant moist white decay or subtle putrefaction, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are guided by the fluid that has accumulated from those below for their exit and by effusion; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exit, and very often there is a strong discharge from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from those fistulas, some are found penetrating into the space between the bladder and the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And for the case where the fistula penetrates into the anus but does not exit, you should insert a thin, sharp object like a needle or hook into the anus, and attempt to gently erase or pull on the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a fine attempt of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the attempt or hair in its proper place.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of the aforementioned signs nor detect any cause for discharge or swelling, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and you should proceed with caution in treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is emission of urine from that place and prohibition from urinating until that location is medically consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the attempt penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and it causes pain in the surrounding area; and it will feel hot always; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating ulcers, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those requires work and diligence from skilled physicians over which they are firmly established.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are neither penetrating nor ancient, healing with iron is hoped for as per what I have advised you, and what you have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the disease moves between your legs over its sides, raising the patient's legs inside, tilting things towards their belly, and then inserting a lead or iron probe, or if it is in a curved fistula, you must know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert your pointed instrument diagonally into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrates and discovers a space, or feels something between the ribcage and that flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and thus do not work on that, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Some doctors, however, say that it heals certain people's legs.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which one hopes for recovery in them, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistula, which are similar to a quill of down, have healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then attend to those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the tissues that are adjacent are healed, and treat those wounds with medicinal herbs that nourish and consolidate the flesh; if it heals well, it is; otherwise, it will not heal at all with any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters, but does not penetrate into the deep tissue, and between that and the attempt, there is only slightly flesh or a thin membrane, and the fistula affects the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and as you dry the attempt, wait until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the attempt enters; and through the attempt, it is freed and cut off.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those infected flesh openings that resemble punctures from a pen, without any rupture due to any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a feverish flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you inspect those flesh openings, then the best thing to do is use a sharp instrument, either cauterized with fire or acute medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts the two habits well: it molds those attached flesh, and cuts out the pus by drying up the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then take care of those wrapped in calluses or hard skin growths that have formed on the edges where there is friction, and also tend to the infection through hardened, burnt-off flesh that generates and solidifies.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus, the medicines that involve cleansing and cutting; when you have restored it, it is already healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If a fistula has already perforated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and investigate thoroughly.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you sense a tumor and between you and it is clearly of a phlegmatic or fleshly nature, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not surgery upon it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition involves one of three methods: first, cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, drying it out until you can reach the cavity beneath so that you may insert some remedy; and do not use amputation because you would not be able to close the wound properly, nor let the pus escape, and you should heed the wishes of the patient; and take care of it as we have said, for it will heal strongly. Or else, elongate that membrane and drain the pus that has dried up within it, right next to the anus, as we have mentioned, using a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then clean those fistulated meats with cauterization if necessary; and endeavor to make the complete restoration of all the wounds through surgery, and if the orifice filled with pus does not heal, puncture the open fistula in the anus, and let the pus flow out more gently due to the patient's condition.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is on the side of the buttock near the surface of the body and at the margin of the buttock, take the probe of the perforating end, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that wound enveloped in your fields or around those; then, insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is penetrant at the margin of the anus very close by, then extract the thread from that trap as you insert the thread into the anus; remove the end of the thread and join both ends together, and leave it thus for a day or two, and when you more deeply cut the thread into the flesh, begin again with that until the flesh between the two ends of the thread is cut through and they fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either by moving the patient or otherwise, since it is not for you to do this so as not to cause an injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine that through which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharp in one direction and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cause damage when you do this, thus carefully.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus flows from the incision of those (hemorrhoids).
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways, either they are between the anus and resemble stones, or those (hemorrhoids) are with the grease of excess weight.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, the wound flows from them at that time and it is one, very red, very hot, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are very open at the anus can be treated with a few drops of seawater or a little bit of salt and vinegar, which flow continuously, and they are according to the colour of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is that you command the patient to defecate, and press until the pain subsides and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you hold yourself and suspend with your fingers or what you have at hand, and then cut those parts gently to remove the hemorrhoids.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the cuts are not held in those by their moisture and softening of them, then take a coarse cloth or a cotton ball or a woolen pad, and remove those from your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powder over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those in place instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the bowel does not obey and is slow to pass, then sharpen the sickness with a small incision, wash it with water that sits on the stomach, and thus encourage its expulsion when the sickness squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is lighter, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with wax, and cut them off, then care for those as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who perform the incision, note how to apply stitches to them according to this method: take a thin thread and wrap it around, then insert the needle into the parts above the hemorrhoids, and do the same below, and wrap both ends of the thread on either side of the needle, and tie it taut; and stretch the hemorrhoid with firm compression, and tighten the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this continuously, leaving none of them untouched, so that the superfluous blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place your hand over the cloth soaked in warm oil or wax; press it upon the wound and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that from the wound; and when it is healed, treat those with ointments or other remedies until they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas may occur due to drying out (exsecation) of an opening or due to narrowing (costriction) of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, you will need to clean those with the points of a spatula or with your finger, making sure they remain moist and free from any pus coming from them, which prevents their healing; and then take care of those until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enters, and be careful to cure those that are wounded; then attend to those that need healing.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernia is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that hernia is crucial, and it does not disappear unless treated according to the color of the body, appearing like a small claw, and it is felt throughout the body, especially in the joints of the feet and legs, and through these pains, you should address it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then, you should incise what is in the area around the claw, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its root; and then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned previously in your chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May a verruca be a small, rough, round ulceration on the surface of the body, often appearing in the majority of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or open it again with a sharp tool within the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical tools, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now, the warts have been removed both inward and outward with the instrument you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a wasp be a small, hardened or rounded ulceration on the surface of the body, often accompanied by itching, and when the doctor feels it, it resembles a wasp sting, and it is found around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a sharp cannula, either of goose or rabbit feathers, and insert it firmly into the swollen lymph node until it retains the shape of the cannula; then rotate your hand with the cannula until you puncture what lies within the circumference of the lymph node, and place it on the base of the flesh, and remove the lymph from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you prefer, make this as a cannula of iron or steel in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part protruding from the cannula should be delicate, soft (not perforating), wrapped around itself so that when it is removed from the lymph node, the pain associated with it is alleviated and the rotation of that part is smooth.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the lymph node as mentioned above in the section on cauterization, follow these steps.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give ice.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes ice is made from silver or lead or melted earth; and sometimes it is made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, for the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose backs are stiff or painful, the ice of those will be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few ice pieces:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the tube of it from above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and its distinction is where the bag is bound as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), slightly bent, and tailored to subtlety; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays and more narrow a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be filled with medicinal fluids from a beast's bladder or sheepskin, and its size be that of a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with many such instruments as it is turned; and if the space between the parts is large, the size of that instrument should be accordingly.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those parts strong, fresh vinegar, or surround them with it; adjust the bag to those parts; and when the bag is in place on the affected area, tighten it firmly between two distinct points at a strong cost, and then bind each part: The quality of binding should be such that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should be made to lie on their back, raising their legs with pillows so that they rest on something flat or a lance; and apply the tip of the cautery to oil or egg albumen or a paste of fenugreek or similar; then insert it into the anus easily, and let the assistant take over the bag and press and squeeze it vigorously until everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with it for the entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that the patient needs to be treated with hot applications and vomiting to expel the humors, then you should continue with the cautery until healing is achieved.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful ulcers, then use a gentle and warm application, of which the heat should be carefully controlled, as these hot applications are what children are taught to use.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already stated in the previous section regarding the treatment of plagues what is suitable for each case, and you have given the cure for those with more severe conditions and using various medicines according to their needs.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to where they are inflicted and according to the place where the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are thus: the heat of fire, or an incision of space or metal, or a strike with a lance, or a blow with a staff, or an arrow, or similar to those heat-causing factors.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The plagues that are in the body's parts may also be a plague that strikes the head, or the collarbone, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is very important to recommend the treatment of certain plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the recollection of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to the pressure of stone or something similar, and the patient has already bitten the tongue and it is a severe pain, and you fear that the disease will progress to apoplexy cauterization, you should immediately puncture and drain the head, and do not delay; and extract the blood from the vein according to the amount of virtue in it, unless there is any other cause prohibiting fleubotomy, especially if the vein that has been left from the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And fleubotomy is contrary to the previous procedure; and attention should be given to the patient's diet, as well as avoiding heavy food and drink.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If, however, any cause prohibits minimization, then the diet should be restricted, and one should avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the plague, if it develops into cauterization apoplexy, apply a small amount of hot oil or wine in which a stick has been soaked.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the abscess's location, apply pressure to the sore, if it is fresh and its pus hasn't changed, then carefully extract it.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, apply some clean bandages until it heals.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or for some reason needs more space and its edges are not properly joined together, then adjust them with stitches according to the suturing method described for them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the sore has already exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not a retention but a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the area of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are rough: seeds and forms similar to their shape, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, you incise all of it that is rotten and remove it, and then take care of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues are an artery or vein from which pus flows and is not severed by medicines, then you should investigate the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should incise it with a knife, or tie it off; and if, in the process, it becomes necessary to do something that we have not mentioned, then you should cauterize it until the pus has been drained.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered trivial; so much so that you sprinkle on them this powder, which, when solidified, prevents the air from changing those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil from crushed seeds of dragon's blood, two parts of dried pus, and three parts of finely ground and sieved charcoal; fill the plague with it, and tightly compress it with a good constrictive bandage so that it adheres to the affected area, and coagulate the pus with it.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is in this condition, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times, it requires only cautery, when there is no fever or dragon's blood present.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is also performed on large hernias when it is necessary to pause and tighten them, and they are recently inflamed with their own blood, the air in them has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has been altered, especially during the summer, then one cannot understand the position of this powder, but instead, apply what we have said, so that you pause over these inflamed places with a paste of eggs or knead flour with water and honey until they are healed; and then apply the other treatment to them.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture of the bone occurs in a small area, then you extract it by manipulation.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And tell the cure for skull fractures where it is dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the chest.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the chest, it does not differ much in treatment; similarly, the plague of the head is simple when compared to others.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the chest are cut, then, if it is a nerve, there is no need for elaborate treatment other than to avoid treatment that causes violent spasms; just as when they inject and bind it with something like vitriol or similar substances to numb them and relax the contraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of all the body's members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If this requires treatment with lighter medicines, it is also washed with water twice, sometimes with rosewater or other water, and then dried with a cloth, keeping the area moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is severe, then a suture is administered, or the edges of the wound are bound, and care is taken with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or there is pus in it, then it is pierced at the most painful point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the wound already involves an incised artery and there is blood flow, then it should be separated or dried, or tied off, or cauterized if this is necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already incised the spine from the nape or entirely, and saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the spine's canal and do not touch it; equalize that and return it to its natural form, and tighten it with appropriate stretch, and leave it for some days; and then care for it with ointment where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the infection has already taken hold within the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of foreign bodies, extract all that you can from them; leave what does not belong to the body until the infection dies down, becomes separated, and is removed from the affected area.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the infection is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the infection has caused a fistula, then treat it with the water whose memory will come to you in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the plague of the collar or similar, when it appears between the shoulders and is made with space or a knife or a lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or knife wound and one can feel the depth of it, then consider more carefully if the plague has taken hold and its condition deepens; then you will know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the plague is recent, then at first you should apply a poultice to it, and don't press too hard so that the pus isn't trapped in the depth of the wound and returns to affect the heart and cause more harm; instead, apply a comforting ointment to it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you don't have any ointment, then place a clean cloth over the wound to absorb whatever comes out; and make the patient lie on the affected area so that whatever is in it can drain properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has passed three days or more and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or tightness of the chest occur, and other good dispositions of the body manifest, then you will know that the plague is safe; and from there, treat those who are sick with calmus and other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the plague is prolonged and still open, you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is due to an incision of the skin or a wound, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with the method mentioned above, either with stitching if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the plague has already affected the bones and you have made an incision to remove parts of it, then you should squeeze the plague and extract the separated pieces.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, leave them inside so that the plague does not spread, as their removal is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental injuries in the other members, the treatment in youth is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal ailments.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, or slight, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For a great amount, one sees the intestine or abdominal nerve, so that their intrusion is made and their suture is either very strong or very delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I observe that their reduction is more difficult if one does not carefully place them back in their place immediately, as they open up and become thickened so that the insertion into them becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best dislocation is by means of a midline, for in this case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, whereas it is difficult in both the two types mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for sutures in other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures are specific to other parts, but nevertheless, they are more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you an exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it is said that when the hernia is small and there is no cause in the abdomen for this, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the minimal disruption as we have mentioned, or when the hernia has swelled due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when this occurs, it is necessary to clean that which you immerse in a sponge or cloth dampened in hot water, or take water from a spring, and use it to wash the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, it is useful to use vinegar, which helps in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, once you have determined that the inflammation is resolved, you should moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of salt and mullein, for it helps to remove the remaining causes of pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the pain persists despite this treatment, then you should incise the disruption using a small instrument to cut away the hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is best when it involves no cutting, and there should be no concern about drying or starvation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the sharp knife, and in another part not sharp, and the tip is slightly blunt, rather than having the subtlety of a spatula, it should be somewhat obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the hernia is enlarged and it pushes out the intestine, you must reduce it to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, as it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must raise the patient's head and foot higher than the affected parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And seemingly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must pause your intent and your consideration towards it so that the part where the hernia is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is that you must administer this in both great pains and lesser pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in smaller pains, prepare what you have, and then make the minister between your fingers, holding it entirely with your hand and adjusting its lips, and then gradually uncover from one place to another, seeking any cause for the rupture, both internal and external.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of stitching: take the needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it from the extremity of the rupture on the ring finger, and tighten the needle once; be careful not to pass through both extremities of the thread at once, but rather penetrate one strand from each side, within that space where you make the thread enter; and thus you have added the two extremities of the thread and the two extremities of the finger, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten the thread double around the needle, sometimes from both sides together, and add both lips and the wound for a proper addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and fix another needle to it, just as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you have fully closed the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the fine needles pierce the flesh lightly; while the thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, so it is necessary that they be both fine and coarse.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is necessary that the needle be placed in both ends of the hernia gently, so that the flesh is not pierced too deeply and the hernia opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the stitches should not be too long so that the hernia is not obstructed from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully cut the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the patient during their sleep; place them over the wound with expanded poultices from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the infection is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of suture have needles in what manner is most suitable for small wounds, where one needle or two or even more can be used in the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second suture is more complex: it consists of administering a suture to all four ends (two from the thigh and two from the calf) at once, using an needle carefully wrapped with thread in a specific thickness and delicacy.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle to its initial position from which it began, so that the thread retracts and draws the wound closed in stages; thus, the suture is like a cross-stitch where the threads are tightly strung.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, apply the quantity of the thickest part of the finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch heals men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I have treated the plague that had befallen a man in his belly, which was a rupture of a major plague about the size of a palm, and it had occurred around the intestines near the middle of the abdominal wound; and then I have reduced that part where the plague had entered through the abdomen for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague became consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and he recovered and was healed; and afterwards I visited him for many years, and he returned to his former state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; but by a miracle, for you did not cure him with ointment, for he was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, yet you applied the plague with great care twice a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it became healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of stitching mentioned according to the account of words.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin to stitch the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to the rule and length of the body, leave the tip of the thread on which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other end in the opposite direction of the first.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the needle penetrate there, make it penetrate again from that end of the wound to the inside; leave the tip of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate from the other end of the inside to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make a penetration with that penetration by which you cause it to penetrate into the body at the end of the mirror, which is in its opening, so that all of that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin at this point on the side of the body, and with your hand take hold of the extremity that is on the other side from the opening, then reduce it back into the cavity and with the extremity of the mirror on the opposite side from this penetration; extract that which is in the needle from within.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once, then another time, and keep doing this until you have removed everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this manner of stitching is that you sew with a stitch of skin, which I have mentioned before, so that you sew the body once from the side of the extremity of the needle, and then you pass through it again until the wound is healed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of suture, which is called gallia, and this is of speech about it and for its recompense, is that you sew according to the second layer to which some doctors sew it, thus adding all parts to its corresponding part to it by nature; and apply the extremity of one part of it to the other extremity of it, and the extremity of the opposite side to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you have learned.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take care to keep the needle at the end of the mirror in your hand, and make it penetrate the skin from the outside into that hole, and leave both ends of the cipher; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from inside out through both ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn around those threads and make some of the layers penetrate from inside out between the outer layers on both ends of the mirror other than in the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than common light stitching, as it is the stitch that we remember from before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some may say that the stomach suture is corrected with two needles; so you must insert a thread into each, and begin to introduce this needle from the opposite side, according to the suture of those which join the flesh together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which causes is when you perceive the recent plague at its sore spot in front of the sanch that the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and cauterize it and sew it properly, then place your hand over that fleshly powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place your hand over that alkali soaked with your presence so that it makes hard pain and extracts the humors, and it becomes solidified and healed; and similarly treat that one as the cure for other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply this treatment immediately, since it begins to feel warm, with a little pain and itching, and it changes color twice a day, just as it has been taught to you, until it is healed, for you will not need other medication in case of simple plagues.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you are afraid that the plague might communicate to the principal members, then cover them with lion's hair soaked in oil of high quality, or in melted oil, and place it around the area between the angles and leave the ends free.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, as signs of this condition, you should apply a black, astringent vinegar, especially if the gangrene has reached the intestine and it needs to be removed by penetrating within its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the one affecting the larger intestines has a lighter chance of healing compared to the one affecting the smaller intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And its healing is difficult because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive cure from any plague that strikes it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, the size of them, the subtlety of the body part affected, and its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to stop it recently, reduce it according to your knowledge, affecting all intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been passed into the space and is already red or black, then you should tighten that thread over the area affected by it, so that pus flows, as there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you cut this other material, and secure the two ends of the thread during the departure, leaving the infected part open, so that by removing the fabric and emitting the pus from the plague's branch, the attraction is alleviated.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so you should look for those who have been previously afflicted with a plague in their abdomen, struck by arrows, and had an ancient plague that formed a fistula, permitting management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the treatment of the patient, even if it was not cured through their previous care, rather continue to work on that inner part which is being healed and the location is solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having observed the location now consolidated, pay attention to the patient's pain caused by the accidents in their stomach; do not interfere with any other bad accident that might break their natural dispositions of eating and drinking, and instead immerse them in water and exercise them as appropriate.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And certain experienced people say that when the pain in the intestine is small, it should be treated as follows: take a hot compress from large heads; adjust both lips of the pain and place a compress from those that keep the mouth open over both lips of the pain; therefore, when you press on those and tighten your mouth, cut off the head, for it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another compress close to the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have made several compresses according to the quantity of all the pain.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that and compress the pain; and detach those attached parts within the hernia until the hernia is healed; and cause no harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia appears as a thin, fine thread taken from the hernia of an animal, sharper than a needle; so take the end of these herniated threads, completely devoid of flesh, and closely attach the end of it to the thread, wrap it around, and then insert that thread into the hernia with needles and compress it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the pain is great and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it requires not only compression but also subtlety, and it is not healed completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every ulcer and fistula that forms as a result of aging and decay, if it is not healed and becomes chronic, causing pain for an extended period without healing or being incised, is generally called a fistula in any part of the body, and we refer to it as this disease.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistulas, in truth, are formed by a hard, white, painless substance, with a hollowed-out appearance similar to the cavity created by pain; and for this reason, they are called acute ulcers, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In some cases, the ulcer is wet, causing pain, and a significant amount of fluid can be discharged in a short period.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	At times, the fluid can be thick or thin, abundant or scarce.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already prepared it as mentioned in the division, when you mention the plagues, know that any ulcer which is not healed or is not on naked flesh, is due to one of these causes: among which one is either a lack of blood flow in the body; or malice within it; or because between it and the lips there is hard, non-yielding flesh preventing the natural growth of flesh; or it is due to excessive weight; or because that ulcer itself becomes pus and the material that enters it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is unsuitable; or when corruption prevails in the region, and it is a plague; or by the nature of the region, as is the case with Saragossa, where the dissolution of illnesses is difficult and the healing of abscesses takes a long time due to its natural properties; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, as well as their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so, it is necessary that you know the cure for a fistula which is caused through surgical means by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints composed thusly from the hand and foot; and these are the ones that give rise to proximity to the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas, those following this manner are from the difficult illnesses of which cure is not received, and occupation regarding them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is any of these fistulas that are so deep as to not reach the places mentioned above and you hope and trust in their cure, and wish to come to knowledge of them, then take care or a knife, and if the fistula follows rectitude, and you inquire about it, you will succeed in its treatment.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is curved, then investigate it with a delicate probe, for lead with the lightness of its body is removed and deviated from the curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not possible for you to treat it effectively.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you cleanse them must also affect the other orifices and heal them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then, carefully questioning according to the manner in which you can recognize if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or immediate, or if it is a fistula with only horrible odor, entirely within your power, using all of your strength, understanding, by which you question the illness, and by applying pressure with your hand over the area, and similar to the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with due care, you will proceed to treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is close or in a clean place, far from joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places which you know to be at risk.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula as mentioned in its description, stop what is in that flow and from rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or from parts and similar ones, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude, then you must incise it in the place as far as possible with your knife, and then clean it of all its rotten flesh; and then apply some wrapped bandages with sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have previously understood with the knife.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this so that, after some time, the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with bandages that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this means, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to be certain of this, then examine and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not forbid any cause from veins or nerves or from a main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then scrape that within which the corruption is hosted until it is entirely removed; and take care of that with water as it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the pain persists as before, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; so uncover it again carefully and precisely perform its reason and purification with the last strength of your will, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healthy, so it is; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep, distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus to you it is not worth attempting anything there.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone corruption is small, it may be possible to remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, carefully remove all of them, and leave none due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of discomfort arises from humidity, and in their understanding there is no fear or error, then incise these wounds or flesh if they are here, and carefully remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the area where the pain is located, and leave it there until the pain passes; do not allow that pain to spread to the surrounding bones, flesh, and ligaments, and be careful that the incision you have made during your operation does not become infected.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	While the text does share some linguistic similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, it also contains elements that suggest a unique or regional dialect. Here's a line-by-line translation based on that assumption:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg bone or similar, and what is corrupt of it is only the skin, then quickly apply treatment behind it until that blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the disease.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the corruption has reached a great depth and the decay has already affected the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area completely by making an incision at the site where the corruption has occurred, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to place a cushion at the site, which will serve as an example and aid in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the swelling originates from within the body, concerning the matter inside the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of apoplexy or great apoplexy, and do not focus on external causes for him.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore, the time extends during which the disease worsens due to the errors of doctors, as the gangrene becomes pronounced, and it will be surrounded by moist, putrid matter, and its treatment will be delayed until the leg is fistulated, and it will cause horrible wounds that lead to decay and body humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And therefore, many doctors surround the patient for about two years, not focusing on their knowledge but on the arts, as you will be called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the leg and the matter flowing from these horrible wounds throughout his body; and the skin of that man was entirely stiffened, and its colour was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And therefore, he inserted a probe into one of these wounds and successfully guided the probe towards the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then, he carefully examined all the wounds and discovered their causes from every part of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut and incise over one of the openings, where I discovered a fragment of bone, which was torn, corrupt, and putrid; it had already decayed and been corrupted by a part of the leg that had penetrated into the flesh.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I secured what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I thought that it was not the bone itself but the corruption I had removed and secured, which had already been weakened.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I carefully paused the restoration of the wound using consolidative medicines for a long time, but it was not solidified.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I carefully repeated the process and discovered the bone again, observing the continued corruption within the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will address what appears to me as that corruption, then I'll make you pierce deeply to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you should discover it again and not cease to insert the small bone fragment by fragment and pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you cut around a palm of it, and extract its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly strengthened and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it unless for the arrangement of the fragility of it and the lack of its tolerance, and because of its weakness which leads to death, as it slacks off during all hours due to excessive evacuation, causing a bad fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Thus, healing is complete, and nothing takes the place of the hard bone; good arrangement in its body restores it, returns its virtue, and converts it into its dispositions, without causing any contradiction in walking or damage from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If a bone stands out in the body and needs to be treated, then follow this manner: take lint and tighten it around the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it; then place the thicker lint over the flesh left by the bone, and draw the end of it towards you to pull the flesh away from the gap, and uncover the flesh in the area where you want to make an incision so that the saw does not cut through the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a wooden splint or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, the saw should not cut through the healthy flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be sure to make the incision over the corrupted area slowly, for if it is in the concave part of the corrupt bone and does not appear on the surface, you may need to redo the sawing another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupt and not prominent, but rather a continuous gap with another, and the corruption is in the middle or at any point along it, then uncover the flesh from all sides; place a wooden splint under it, and saw from the first gap where the corruption began until the other gap is completed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, you should incise that corrupt joint and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be cut in a straight line but in an arc.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, and cut away that part, and remove it according to some disposition possible for you, and correct any deformity ingeniously, so that no veins or nerves are injured.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels to use when cutting these bones, as they depend on the position of the bones, the preparation of those bones, their thickness, fineness, size, rarity, hardness, and other qualities; so it is necessary that for any kind of operation, you prepare the appropriate instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument you need; since you have great study and long experience of the ways of this art, and are a witness to the methods of various illnesses, for now you will apply to him what is suitable for it among all instruments for any illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will have learned at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will hold with examples as you proceed with your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the form of a starred key, and its points are in the shape of spikes.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to grind those heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of the larger scalpel compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	The form of the smaller scalpel:
Forma de razori lat:	The form of the broad scalpel:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved more above and have the edge of the steel sharp, and its handle firmly attached.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of the razor with its concave side.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The other very thin razor.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with an extremely curved tip.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tent.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of the saw-like incisor that cuts through bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller saw.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, with its tip like a saw, and it is used in various places when cutting through bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form which is suitable for healing those who are pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and resembles a cover that includes all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the end and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you have applied to that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption spreads to another part of the body where it does not affect any vital function, then you should incise that member within this place where the corruption is localised, so that the malady may escape through it without causing death or serious harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black within, as if fire had consumed it, or you will see the darkness near that wound in that member which is dried up and takes over the whole body; and therefore cut through this with an incision.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources such as the sting of a sea scorpion or a viper or a toad and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is at the tip of the finger, you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you cut off that of the affected finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the entire arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you do otherwise, cut the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption or change of temperature affects the joint, then it is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause of this in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, cut it into one of the bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the edge of the foot, cut off the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to reach the bone, cut the leg at the joint of the bone.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the bone, it is not possible to heal it, but only to alleviate the patient's suffering, and let the disease lead them to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the place; and the surgeon extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and extends the assistant another ligament upon them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without causing much damage until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is either cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it should be covered with a clean cloth from all parts to prevent any contact with the wound, and that the injury to the patient be carefully adjusted and dressed with caution.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the site carefully or apply certain powders to restrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member with ligaments as necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to begin with this man on his foot, these accidents that you and I have recommended, which are due to the dark color in his foot appearing like the burn of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption, which is caused primarily in the inner part of his foot, tends to affect the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And therefore, that man prepares himself for these injuries, seeing the cure going to the member with the violence of his pain and disfigurement, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and applies fire for healing.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time has passed since that injury of this method in the inner part of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it occurred to me, and I found myself reflecting on the superfluity of this method that stops with what is placed over the hand in terms of medicine, and appropriates the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected and we begin to go to the other inner part that we began with the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the surgeon orders to cut with the knife, and you do not want to do it fearing the rebound of that superfluity, but rather you must persevere in the incision of the patient's hand, for the virtue of the malady was on the point of disappearance.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and compelled me to prepare and cut off the hand of that man, and he has been healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this account merely to provide assistance in understanding this malady, but also to explain its cause and how it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the cure of sores and the quality of enema with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, then it breaks and perforates itself, and the pus flows out from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel. The wound above it also becomes covered with a thin crust, but it does not lead to a later infection, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments. It is called a sore, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that corruption spreads throughout a member, it is then called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to cut that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtle and done with a knife, and make sure it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption will not succeed due to its last effect, and if the cord has passed through the face, then you treat it with a cleanser.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the arm that they affect has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and garlic, received in equal parts, put into a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the affected sinus with a clister, strengthen the orifices of the intestines, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that foreign body; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain relieved.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, the sinus is cleansed with water from a burnt substance, when this medicine is not available to you; take ash from a fire, mix it with water, and then use this mixture for enemas until you feel that the sinus has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema of honey and water mixed with a third part of cinnamon; also use an enema of wine and honey mixed together, for honey has cleansing properties and washes away impurities, while wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when the wine lacks excessive stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water that nourishes the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyaphinic and dissolve that oily crust and apply astringent; or cleanse that part with some medicine mixed with oil, which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the swelling are narrow in which the catheter of the cleanser cannot pass, then gradually increase its size with a small iron, and place on it hot compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifice is seemingly wide, then you should add stitches to its lips and leave it with enough quantity for the cleanser to be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the patient from which the arm flows is elevated above its attachments, dry that at the lower part where it is in him so that the arm runs within, for when the arm is restricted in the fullness of his sinew, flesh is generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinew within the bone's surrounding joint without difficulty, then pierce and prepare the member so that the arm flows out of him lightly as you have devised, without any cause for restriction in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are gently applied to the sinew according to what you wish, then extend those over cloth from him.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a quantity that it covers all the sinew; then, incise with scissors along the right side of the orifice of the sinew, making an opening slightly larger than the orifice of the sinew; and extend onto other cloth from him the amount of leons (a term possibly referring to bandages) according to the extent of the opening, and place it over that at a distance from the orifice of the sinew so that the flow of the arm from him is prevented and the cloth does not become too large, but rather change it every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is above the wound of the sinew, which stretches at all times so that it catches what is close to it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinew, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in a gangrenous state.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter being discharged over the wound of the sinew has adhered, or acquired a strong adhesion, then on the seventh day or after, loosen the bandage, remove the plague, change the dressing for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinew has been stretched very much, do not be too concerned about the adhesion of it, for healing will take place on its own, for sometimes flesh grows again in the wounds of some men, and among those who suffer the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a bruised arm has been caused by indigestion and the sinew does not adhere, know that this is because of delayed adherence of the sinew, which is prolonged due to excessive use of medicines; if the medicine itself is humid in its substance and virtue, dry it with dyafynicon when there is an excess of fluid from additional protection.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The last remedy, which is used for healing, is to take dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it to the affected area as if it were a paste, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in the same way when there is no bruise: apply dyafinicon mixed with honey, thick enough, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, grind them, and sprinkle the powder onto honey heated on a fire, then wrap this up in cloth and press it against the sinew; and apply that honey which you have noticed to be thick, sprinkle it onto cloth, and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they administer to him long extracts and roots of celestial lilies (celestial lilies), and ermine flour and centaury, and use these simples either pure or adjusted, triturate them and sift and powder over honey which has been recomposed; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain persists and this treatment does not heal it, you will know that the corruption is in the prior part of the body, and already an inquiry has been made into the bones or other hard members or their ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as has been said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of skin rashes, sore nails, addition of finger incisions, and sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that forms when the nail of the finger or toe becomes infected, and it intensifies on other parts as well. When it persists and its treatment becomes more difficult, it either becomes a cauterized abscess or corrupt, causing puss to discharge which corrodes the root of the nail. It can then corrupt the entire nail, and its corruption reaches the bones within, emitting an unpleasant odor. The end of the finger is affected, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have treated the condition as we have described and do not achieve relief, then cut away with a knife all the excess that is pressing on the joint and apply a hot cautery to the wound nearby, for heat helps in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is strong and the joint healthy, and the excess of the joint wants to break into the flesh, and it begins to hurt and inflame that part, then stop a subtle cut at the angle of the hurting joint, and push it upward and cut the flesh easily, and apply over it whatever they use from fiery medicinal salves until all the flesh is removed; and then care for it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is enough to heal when the corrupt bone remains in place.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe corrosion and corruption in the area, cut into one of the bones as indicated by its recall, and then treat it so that it heals properly.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is a need for striking or scraping on the nail, and this causes intense pain, then you should begin by applying flebotomy to the affected area, and carefully dry the nail with a sharp spatula or secator in a transverse motion from above, and be mindful that the secator does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, as this would cause intense pain and lead to the growth of excess fibrous tissue in the area; then treat the spot to alleviate the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this adjustment, which is innate in the bodies of many people, is entirely composed of flesh in some, entirely of bone in others, or primarily in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate in the formation of the joint, or it is the nature of them in some bones of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born into this world without knowledge of these things suffers greatly, and he who is born with strong joints is better off.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those who are born fleshly, the incision is slight, for you must insert the blade deeply into the root with a gentle stroke.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with a root in the joint, healing is difficult; therefore, guard yourself from the removal of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In him who is born with these roots in the wrong place, you must first insert the knife at the beginning into his flesh in a rounded incision within the bone, and then close it with one of those suitable saws, and afterward take care that it heals well.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that occurs between these joints may happen due to various reasons such as age or the nature of the human who lacks them, or due to hernias or burns from fire, or similar conditions; therefore, remove that consolidation within that joint so that it returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets, dipped in warm oil, so that the joints do not stiffen suddenly, and separate them, or place between them a thin plate of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain parts of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding the incision of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, which are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that occur in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in those who walk, work, or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and drain the patient's blood from the basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their pain is according to two methods: one is to make an incision and remove that black ganglion, and the other method is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the large ganglion is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then the leg of the patient is tightly tied to a superior part of the body at the thigh, above the affected area, and the vein is cut at one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and the black ganglion is lifted upward from the lower part of the leg into the upper part, and from below, upwards, until all the amount of ganglion that you wish to remove is taken out, and this tolerates the virtue of the patient's illness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then close it, and command the patient to abstain from cold, black-generating foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this relieves the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the patient should be done in this manner: you who support the thigh of the patient, if it is covered with hair, then bathe it and immerse the thigh in water until it becomes engorged, so that the veins are distended; or if the patient has been exercising vigorously, without a bath, then apply heat to the affected member.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then cut the cord at the right of the vein, either in its length or at the very end, or at the lowest part of it, you should tie it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then open the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and it is necessary to assess the patient's condition; if the disease declines towards blackness, then...
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so when you have extracted it from the wound, you will see that white matter which is the thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place your fingers inside so that it raises and detaches from the wound, and gently pull out any sharp or foreign objects.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut, about three fingers deep, and carefully remove the edge of the wound away from the vein until it appears clean.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise it and carefully cut into the deepest section, just behind the toe, extract it, and raise it until it comes out through the second cut, and then remove it from the one above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the highest or topmost section of all the cuts, ensuring that all are drained, and then carefully cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not succeed in extracting and elevating it, insert a strong double-ended needle and tie it there, or insert the ray and turn your hand over the entire area where it has been thrown.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it breaks, it is difficult to raise that part and it will harm the patient through that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once you have completely removed it, place your hand over the infected area, wet with wine and oil, both warm and cold, and treat that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting and wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then cut your incisions over all of its twisting parts and the places where it is wrapped up, and with a tie raise that entire part.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to injure the vein and do not bother it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it up; use your prudence in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an ulcer:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as acute with ulcers nor has it the extreme sharpness that would injure a vein; and it possesses great flexibility, for if it were too subtle, it might puncture the vein because of its subtlety; therefore, in this case, its excessive thickness serves as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is produced in the legs, as it were, with the heat of the sun in the lands of Arabs and in the hindlands and arid lands of India with little vegetation and no grass or open space.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And a strong burning is caused in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the growth of the hernia is putrid, as serpents and worms, and scabs and vermin arise between the hernia and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending arrival of the hernia is this vehemence of inflammation that occurs in the thigh, and the area becomes vesicated; then the vein begins to drain from the area of that vesication, which seems to be torn from the inside.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the hernia appears, you will notice that you must wrap over it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Then enter the dragon within it and leave the lead suspended from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And on many occasions when something causes the hernia to protrude outward, wrap it in lead and notice that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, you make an incision into it and wrap the raw area; do not cut the one that is inflamed, as if you do, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing abscesses, gangrene in the place, and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary to treat it further and extract it little by little, until it is completely removed from the backside of it, without leaving any cause of it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is withdrawn in some men to the length of their palms and fingers, and I myself have seen it withdraw one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, insert the ray into the channel of it and pierce that long channel into the flesh, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is sometimes seen with great swelling, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes much pain, and it comes from each painful branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so cure that as we have said in the division and refer to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine irritation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called bovine ill in some lands because it causes great pain, as small worms can be seen within the bowels and flesh, spreading throughout the body, pushing and weakening (the bowels), until they rupture the bowels and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of this illness is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms and snakes and roundworms and ascariasis in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by the malice of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the joints, strongly breaks into them and destroys the joints, and from there it should be treated with care.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done unless you first understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what remains below it firmly, and press upon it, and then extract that which is within it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery over the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which also corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it affects the head near the joints, then tighten over the eyebrow with firm pressure, and press upon it, and extract that which is within; and take care that the patient uses purification of their body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On cutting through the illness above.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I have told you about.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You have been called to a female patient in a village, and you discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein near the wrist, which you punctured for an hour, and as you pulled out the needle, you saw that inflammation go away, seemingly by itself, just like living silver as it flows from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he removed the pain from that place and left it in the muscle, and applied pressure for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct the other body in turn until reaching the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I realized that I had to turn myself over completely in bed, according to what I had seen; and I was too amazed at the change of posture and the speed with which it occurred from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many who are terrified by the intense pain of having it change from one part of the body to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	You do not see this in the feet of women in the same way.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you should not consider this to be the reason why the woman was old, but rather because her body was weak and her skin dry and her veins visible, and in this state, the sensation of that changeability appears.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retrospective treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with clogged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you wish to treat the patient and they feel pain, do not appear to give aid as we have said, but tighten over that area and let it rest slightly and dry out, and apply a cautery to that place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not find it in your veins, then cure that by removing the inflammation from the body and what expels air, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of serpents and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in whether they have sharp or blunt points, concave or convex shapes, or are hollow; some have three points, others have tongues, and yet others are feathered.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it is divided into two manners: for the members or principal members affected, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, spleen, bladders, and others; and so when it attacks any of these members and appears to be causing death, which I have already mentioned, you must understand that you avoid extraction of this arrow from those parts where death seems to occur, and if these symptoms do not appear, and the arrow is not lodged deeply in the member, then extract it and cure the disease.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant, when it strikes with an arrow, and passes through the bone, and it arises from the base which is over the brain, due to the sudden heat, and scotoma, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of speech and angry vomiting, and great loss of words and destruction of voice, and it leaves from the place of the disease a white humidity resembling powder, and spots like fluidity of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these symptoms appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the arrow penetrates the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel a hard impact where it is lodged, without any visible cause; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to the pulsation of the pulse, and the flow of black pus, and chills, and fainting spells; then know that death follows swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung show pus-filled black plague, and the vessels near the throat become inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily, and requests fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is most acute near the small ribs, it causes intense and violent pain, with deep sighs, and debilitates all the muscles of the body.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If an arrow hits the stomach, then it often causes intense pain from the undigested food within.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the viscus or hernia, and there is little hope of recovery unless the arrow is extracted.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow strikes the bladder and causes it to leak urine outside, and brings on severe pain in the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Similarly, the other parts such as the face, neck, and head, shoulders, elbows, spine, hip, leg, and foot, and similar parts of the limbs can be saved with great care when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that it may be understood concerning their use in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that when an arrow enters the lacrimal duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose and is extracted from the other side, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, then he is healed, and there is no damage to his eye socket.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had entered his eye in the grays, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there, except for a small tip that remained embedded in his eyeball, it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, like a lion ferrule without eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no further harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into the gullet, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one with the pointed end; and then I incised through it between two guidelines, and it was already submerged in the victim's gullet; and then I removed it gently, and thus the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he also extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and he thought that he would die from it; so, after passing thirty days and nothing changing regarding the man's condition, he incised through the arrow and disengaged it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And he saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the pain was firmly established upon him; so after setting fire nearby, he extracted the arrow at the root of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And he saw a woman who had an arrow pierced in her belly, and the pain was firmly established within her, not changing regarding her condition; and the woman did not lose strength in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man whom an arrow has struck in the face, and the wound is deep, so he removes the arrow, causing little pain, but many similar ones.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the face of the king's prince who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and entirely hidden was the arrow.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the treatment of him, as soon as the arrow's wound had closed within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then he examined the arrow wound very closely; and then he inquired about it with subtlety, and did not feel it; but he felt a piercing sensation remaining behind the right ear, and then he hoped that this piercing was due to the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied a plaster to the place with an attractive and digestive effect, trusting that this location would become exposed for me to see the place of the arrow, so that it dried up over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be alarmed if the arrow has not reached the exact location; continue applying the plaster to it for several days without incident; and as the wound heals, break up the abscess of the hernia over several days until you feel the arrow within its sheath again and bring it back to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should focus on treating the acute corrosive wound with specific medicine for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently try to loosen it, and cauterize the tip of the arrow which is adhering to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the wound using that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I will dedicate time to it for periods of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has inflamed and I can insert scissors into it, I will hold it and do not let go, until I find a way to extract it using forceps carefully, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter, until I remove that; and then I will restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, and they restore it so that the illness is solidified, and the disease is cured entirely, without any recurrence.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows so that it provides rules and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those in the narrative are not understood, nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans speak a little about what is present and much about what is absent; they search for new operations and new instruments, seeking the descent of foreign causes from the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not forcibly ejected from the members in which they are lodged, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or conversely, from the other direction.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is thrown from the place where it enters, or is aimed proceeding in a fleshy part, and is thrown out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not observe the time when cats are at their most active, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes weak and the attraction of it and its exit is relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not observe its time, leave it for a few days until the attraction and motion of it ceases on certain days, and then it will be thrown out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not observe its time for a few days, then know that you must pierce the path of the arrow at that bone in a subtle way as it travels, until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If an arrow is embedded in the skull bone and has pierced one of the brain's ventricles, upon examination, certain symptoms may appear, which I will describe later. In this case, do not remove the arrow immediately, but leave it inside for some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death may be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only pierces the flesh and does not reach the brain, and the patient lives for some days without any complications from these injuries, then devise a way to remove the arrow and the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is impossible to remove the arrow without causing further harm, then apply treatments around the arrow's path as we have recommended, and tend to the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body and lodged in a nerve, you should explore it gently, and if you feel any response, pull it with some suitable instruments to facilitate its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the compression of the plague and the length of the arrowhead, here neither nerves nor veins are involved, then make an incision over the plague until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached that should be removed, then cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the tools you can use; and devise a way to remove the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes solid.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow at any location, use torsion with your hand and forceps from all sides until it becomes solid; and carefully with the greatest subtlety to prevent the arrow from breaking and make its removal difficult.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach that of your choice, then wait for some days until the parts around it can be separated; and then repeat the procedure when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience discomfort from a blood flow, then administer what we have said for treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or strings, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, delay, and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by others.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you must target the location of the arrow in it, as it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your capability, then administer what is within your capabilities according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Consider arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of another party, or that already have encountered some resistance from external parties, or make the end of the arrow flexible due to the pressure exerted by the upper part of the body and turn it towards [the target]; then focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and shoot it, for it is made light for projection.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the direction of the arrowhead within the bone, and magnify it with your hand, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not heal within a few days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is within the flesh, then push it towards the wound.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft has fallen and you wish to give impulsion, then insert a point and if it is hard, strike it with force so that it enters into the hollow of the bone in the arrow's head and then push it towards the wound.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then push it with a strong force so that it enters within itself, for the arrow is directed away from that point.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is deeply embedded, carefully remove all the flesh around it where the true injury lies, if you can, and tend to that part as best you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel the impact, and if it is possible for you to remove it without causing further injury, then do so and be careful not to cut into veins or nerves, and extract the arrow, and dress the wound as needed, and treat the injury accordingly until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Design of forceps for removing arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, crafted with a serrated edge to grip the arrow firmly so it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, from large to small, according to the size of the arrow and its hardness, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the affected area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	A method of encouraging this concave extremity to open up with external pressure, in order to remove the arrowhead lodged within it, and to push out that dense mass.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of encouraging a dense extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	in such a way with pressure, so that the arrowhead lodged within the concave is removed and it is pushed out.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, of which there are several, are as follows: two pulsating veins located near the ears, known as the temporal arteries; two found on either temple; and two in the two lacrimal bones, called the lacrimal veins. There is a vein prepared in the middle area of the forehead, and one at the tip of the nose; two veins are found at the collarbone; two on the lower lip; and two on the upper lip. These are known as the 'veins of the tongue'. These are the veins that are called 'venae adstringentes'.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are considered, one is a cephalic vein, which must be collected; and the people call it "the vein of the head," dense, and it is the median vein, consisting of a branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of the whole body," and the basilic vein is the one that stops in the domestic arm, and they call it "cualar," and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and the brachial vein, which is stopped over the elbow, is that in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is that which appears on the skin through manifest appearance; and the temporal vein, which is between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, is only two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of these is left in the curvature of the inner side of the wild arm; the second is superficial, and its location is left where the domestic leg bends; and the sciatic vein, its location is left where the wild leg bends; and on the leg there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is for ancient cataracts, bleeding, and ulcers of the head, old evils.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from these veins depends on what you have learned: it should be near the patient's head, and rub the patient's head on the occiput at the location of both wide-open veins with good friction; then tighten the patient's collar with a band so that both appear and their locations where the auricles are in two places securely fastened to the head; and seek as they say, and if you feel the pulse from those as they say, here it should be attempted.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the cutting sword, and this one is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the groin until the bloodletting reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and cut into the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or slightly more; and make the cut as deep as necessary.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply strong pressure with poultices and leave them until the wound is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this text the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflows in the feet.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing fleubotomy on those is according to what you have recommended: restrict the patient's movement until the two veins appear by direct observation, and demonstrate the pulse after their removal; and then you should be careful.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, lift the cord above the vein at its attachment as is commonly indicated, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument below, lifting the vein up; and cut it similarly as you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then, apply pressure to the compression of the patient, place the commonly indicated tool over the vein for an hour, and apply pressure on that side and poultice it, and tighten it with firm constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And previously, the remembrance of them has been made, and of those, incision, and attraction at the beginning of the opening.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient facial maladies, and migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the technique of the flebotomy is according to what you have learned; so, the illness tightens its col with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the "scoop," the shape of which is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the point at the prominent end of the scoop over that vein and strike it with a lean or other tool in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the puncture from the patient's flesh until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, the vein is opened with a broad flebotomy, but it is not appropriate that the flebotomy be of such acute severity as the others, but rather of a lateral extremity, and flebotomize according to the transverse, because the bone there is strong and would easily break during a subtle flebotomy.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But pay attention to the youth of the two veins that are like the tears of two wheels due to the friction and soot of the wheel on the feet, and to the diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the collar around it, then you make a cut in those veins, and stand over the top of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a little vein, as in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is fine, then only the end of it should be cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then drain the blood as much as necessary, and press over those parts, tighten them for a night, and then open them up.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and violent vomiting, and for facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for it is that the illness tightens its collar, then you take hold of its nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long cut, placing it in the middle part of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and soon the blood begins to flow.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure that you complete the phlebotomy slowly and let the blood flow as needed; then close it up after a night, because this way it is restored more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The immediate aftercare of phlebotomy, for both the two cases, should include restricting activity, beginning leprosy treatment, and addressing any acute or chronic illnesses and corrosive ulcerations with potent remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for these cases is that the patient strains as each one is left in their place with a bandage; and the practitioner stands over the patient's head, and the patient lies on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then, make small incisions in the vein with a phlebotomy knife; and remove blood from the vein as needed, according to its quantity or as required by necessity; and then close it up like the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then clean the ligament and tighten both veins with a moderate strain so that the malady is not exacerbated, and place a bandage within the matrix until the pain is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the healing of phlebotomy on the veins, it compares to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, and the decay of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around the eyes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these is to cease the malady in front of you, tighten the neck of it with a bandage, then reverse the lips of it and observe both veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the blackness of either, and this is because there are small veins around them; and then incise each through precise incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt in your mind, and you do not know which one it is, then proceed to incision of the larger one among them, and from the pus that manifests from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it appear as if there are two veins in their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	This is often done to cut the two veins that are located in the patient's lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The veins located in the tongue's base, when exposed, usually require a phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at the sides of the throat, as well as treatment for conditions affecting the uvula and mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomy involves addressing the condition between your fingers and toes, lifting the tongue, observing beneath it, considering both sides—the vein and its opposite—and the color of each, which tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform phlebotomy on each one; be careful not to finish with your hand when phlebotomizing them, as those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin, through which blood usually flows in all men, the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either by using a phlebotomy needle or olive oil with subtlety declining; or by cutting phlebotomy, and this is called phlegmasia, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this phlegmasia is what you use for incision, and these are special knives and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of olive oil phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Both the width of the vein and its location must be considered, and it is necessary to open the concave veins filled with thick blood, and those containing large clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this fluctotomy is of smaller extent and has finer terminal points, and it is appropriate for fluctotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood clots.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the jugular vein being one of three veins, when performing fluctotomy on this basilic vein, it is to extract the blood clot from the malady that has spread to the throat and neck, and from here it flows to the foot and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the fluctotomist, when performing this fluctotomy, to be very careful and cautious there, because if he leaves an artery, and makes a mistake in the puncturing of the fluctotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flow of blood, so it is important that he does not perform fluctotomy on that artery with a sharp instrument, but rather cuts it carefully with a less sharp one.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear indication, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform fluctotomy in its place at the end of the arm, because it is manifest. And so too you must cut that one with a less sharp instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, then cover in front of the stricture of the arm that you touch the location within which you recognize the position of the pulse, and apply pressure over it tightly; then bring the arm close and sec the vein with a concave section for a flebotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid striking the percussion on any space in the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, with strength the ligament, there appears an inflation in the location that you have pressed tightly, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you press and feel the blood flow in the flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the blood is thin and clear, then know that it is from the artery's blood; and immediately cut and hold your finger over that area for a long time; and if the bleeding stops, as you have seen it stop, then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient from their waste, and be very careful of them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the stone cannot be removed, and you are not skilled in medicine for this case, then incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of the stone is contracted and the stone is separated; or take a piece of fistic (possibly a type of plant or material used medicinally), and make that into a poultice, apply one half over the vein at its stricture with liment (bandage) and pulvils (medicine or herbs) within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the stone is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat that with the water as mentioned before in the location of the broken powder flow of the stone.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the stone from him is difficult due to the location of the pain and the possibility of bracelet (bandage) tightness on his arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Regarding the dark vein, phlebotomy is a useful method to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be cautious in performing phlebotomy on someone who is overly afraid of phlebotomy, for there is a nerve involved; and when you reach the point of phlebotomy and find the nerves, it will cause stupor, and healing will be difficult, and often not complete. This nerve causes sensation; if it is concealed in some men and is subtle and not visible, then you must pause the phlebotomy you are performing, cut off the vein with your forceps, and avoid damaging the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief to ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this particular case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with a phlebotomizer olive or phlebotomizer myrtle, it is because it avoids all veins, leaving no arteries or nerves intact.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to keep in mind that during the phlebotomy, you should not puncture the head of the lizard too deeply, seek a lighter place, and do not pay attention to it, if it is not obstructed by the first percussion that is done prior to the phlebotomy on some occasions.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, a strong pain may be felt in certain people when not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not pay attention to that sign of pain.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy and its complications are factors that you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translated into English is: "The first of these is what you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in the hope of the patient, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the elbow, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and phlebotomy is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and during winter, proper diet should be followed, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if before, after three hours from sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be administered when it is convenient and necessary, at any time of day or night, during any hour and any moment.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary to know that children should not be subjected to phlebotomy until they are 13 years old, women who are pregnant should not undergo phlebotomy unless it is after the fourth month and before the seventh, and the elderly should not be subjected to phlebotomy if they have already passed 60 years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be freed from some condition in any way, it is necessary that he purify his bowels before performing the surgical procedure of flebotomy with a lion's claw, if there is a significant gap therein, so that the veins do not expel the excess fluid during the flebotomy of the purified bowels, which are clean, and they do not affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let the patient not be subjected to flebotomy if they are ignorant of sacred rituals and gluttony, or if they evade illness or madness until this is rectified within them, or if they suffer from hydropic ailments, and more often than not, flebotomy should be postponed due to colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplied thigh, leg, and foot issues, or any cause that dissolves vitality, whether it be in the body or the soul.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is necessary to consider the subtle balance of humors in relation to this, if the swelling is caused by excessive food and drink, and medications if it is possible for him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse in water if no contraindications exist or if some exercise has been performed to reduce the inflammation.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy at the patient's foot around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that foot, which must be watched on that day from all animal accidents, as in pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, when work and superfluous effort occur, or when there is heat and swelling similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his side, let the causes be present of which the use is customary among men for aromatics, odors, balms, and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is soft rather than the hard cushion of him who was to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the flebotomator two or three times; then tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And whether the constriction is firm, so that the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is excessive, then flow of the sanie is prohibited; or whether it is for softening, then the flow of blood from the sanie is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the constriction, ensure that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are swollen and visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the flebotomist applies a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy instrument; they place their left hand's thumb on the vein, slightly removing the location where the flebotomy should be performed, so that the vein protrudes a little, and the pressure is relieved; for when you perform the flebotomy on veins that are thus stretched, after the flebotomy, they contract, and if they do not contract, those veins are narrowed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the flebotomist be skilled and adept in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after performing the flebotomy, if the vein is inflamed at once, then you are done; otherwise, repeat this another time, leaving that place slightly, or apply heat to it, if the location is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is infected or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two and do not strain the wound, as it will cause severe infection, nor should you immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the flebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the blood flow subtle, and you fear that it will not allow the desired amount of extraction, then repeat the flebotomy at that spot according to its location, and apply heat to it before making a new cut, as the wound is infected in many cases, and a small wound is sufficient.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may sometimes be already inflamed, so do not pay attention to it, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply some oil to that particular part of the wound, because it soothes the body from pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location than other oils, or any other oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil in any form of vein-opening (fleubotomy) is a crucial step to prevent the formation of clots and pain in the body, especially when these clots are thin and easily moved, as they are subtile and can be turned around when treated at the right time.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large inflammation occurs at the site of fleubotomy, due to the occurrence of various accidents, especially when it is not bleeding but rather a swelling, or in the perception of a small vein, then you should apply, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, on that area for an hour, as it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it should be done immediately after collecting the blood from that vein or another.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days there appears any discoloration or green color, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply a poultice of olive oil and myrrh dissolved, or a compress of mint juice or warmth or anything similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often, accidents occur leading to the need for flebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel any tenderness, apply your compression to that area; if the lump is bad and painful, then be careful not to press on anything that causes this, as strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area where there is inflammation, so that the place is healed, and take care of the other treatment as it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the dominant color appearing on the skin.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the blood is black, leave it to settle until it becomes clear; similarly, if you draw out thick blood, leave it to settle until it becomes thin; and if it is agited, hold it back until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of one who is full and strong and requires blood extraction at once; in such a case, enlarge the incision on the vein and make the venipuncture wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is fearful, do the opposite and extract it in several attempts, ensuring the needle is narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best approach for venipuncture is to make a transverse cut, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of flapping surgery is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and more safe than flapping surgery according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is usually prone to fainting after flapping surgery, and know that you cure that before the flapping surgery with a small amount of wine infused with mild herbs or simply scorched oxgall; and extract it from the blood in three or four strokes.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is inflammation of the wound, then take before the flapping surgery pa (a small amount) infused in essenrop of myrrh or in essenrop of scented honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in aromatized essenrop with a strong scent.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs after flapping surgery and it is caused by a great deal of blood, then know that you should take in small amounts of beef blood and fragrant essenrop; and use the aromatics with alga, and cool your foot at that place.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the gangrened limb a second time, as in the case from which flebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and its virtue is fresh, which evacuates the small gangrene little by little, according to the amount of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If one wishes to extend their arm and dissolve the gangrene a second time, and their body is strong, then do this after approximately seven or nine hours from the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	One who wishes to throw the gangrene of the body in the opposite direction from which it inclines, should do so on the second or third day after it has extended.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	A person whose body has much hardened gangrene, is acute and causes fever, should have the gangrene evacuated in one go, and a large quantity of it, so that the perception intensifies until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the gangrened limb's pulse, to prevent death from syncope, as these attempts should be made when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press on it with vehemence and gently extend it.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habitize the layman so that a second flebotomies can be performed; or otherwise, this should be done with the sharpness of the flebotomy instrument coagulating the blood in the orifice of the vein; or press on it with a lion's tooth hemostat, or one of sage, and apply light compression until the blood has completely drained.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection has healed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the artery or vein when they are not accessible or concealed, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the arteriotomy is that the patient inserts their hand into the water until the wound becomes numb and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and perform the arteriotomy according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be an open view, and your arteriotomy must be such that you perform it over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the water and stop the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in the cold water, and in winter, the body of the sun is most relaxed in cold water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is much safer than that of all other veins, because it has neither pulsating blood nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand firmly on it, as you have placed it in cold water, so that the vein swells and becomes clearly visible; then make a transverse incision; and if you pierce it from top to bottom, then it will not bleed again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to sever the nerve of the hand with the phlebotomy, as it is exposed due to the removal of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat the hand in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand over the vein with oil and salt, so it is not hardened suddenly; and be careful that you do this in a narrow space.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of the phlebotomy of that with the left hand, is it appropriate for the illnesses of the chest.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the phlebotomy of him as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the treatment of the vena cava from the phlebotomy is for illnesses that are in the parts left of the body, as well as for illnesses of the mother, and to stop menstruation, and for illnesses of the lungs and ulcers of parts and clothes, old or new, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the technique of phlebotomy in this case is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction is applied until the veins become visible; then a bandage is placed over the joint of the foot, and the location of the vein is marked so that it can be easily identified, from which it branches out into numerous small veins on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore the phlebotomist should make a large cut or leave the leg in a position that facilitates the appearance of the veins, as this is better and more efficacious.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if phlebotomy is performed on the foot, you must be careful of the nerves that are left beneath the surface of the foot, and place your hand gently as you perform phlebotomy at an angle, as if you were about to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be bold with your phlebotomy.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is prohibited to urinate, then you should wash the foot in warm water and let the urine flow out until it is emptied.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then they should repeat the phlebotomy in another small area, since the place is clean; and do not fear infection from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do similarly with the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for sciatic vein, the place as we have said is beneath the talus, at the insertion of the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the healing of the phlebotomy wound is at the hip joint when it is for a blood let.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the flebotomy is that the disease enters the body, and quickly and tightly extracts the blood from the vein on the inside of their leg with a long thin bandage, so that only this appears.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, you perform the flebotomy on that part according to each engineer's ability and according to the incision, which is best; either you make an incision there by incision or cut off that part by secation, since the place is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is a rare occurrence in many people; and if you find it, and it does not appear painful to the touch, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the big toe and the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then carefully release the constriction and place your hand over the site of the flebotomy, gently holding it, as it is said to be healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	About ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilators can be of wood, or iron, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is performed in two ways: one involves the incision and drainage of pus, and the other involves ventilation through incision without draining pus.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation, which is through incision, is also performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilators that are administered through incision and drainage of pus are in 12 places on the body, one where ventilation is paused, which is the last opening at the top of the head; another located in the middle of both sides of the collarbone; ventilators below the jaw, leaving the mandible outside the mouth; ventilators made of two spatulas; ventilators on the liver, over the end of the ribcage; ventilators consisting of two foils, each spanning two arms' length; ventilators with two pins; and ventilators with two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And venation should not extract the san (vein) but only from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should venation be done with fire or hot coals in any illness caused by congestion within the body until it is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If venation is necessary for illness or in continuity, we should begin it at the start of the month and end it at its conclusion, and perform it at specific times during the day and at intervals.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men, the vein becomes multiplied until they require venation to remove it, and it finds grave difficulty and hardness; and from these, congestion and redness are found on their face and head, and in their eyes; and from these, puffiness on their face and forehead and darkness and weakness in their feet; and from those who spill the site of their venation; and from these, their laughter increases; and from these, they taste blood in their mouths or their tongue is coated with blood; and from these, their sleep increases, and from those who spit out blood while sleeping, pain, redness, plagues, and other similar causes arise.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when in any case of those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, they command that ventilation be done rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate ventilation of the neck is that when it gives weight to the head and what collapses into the ears, it is more important that this be a proper evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the location of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use what is of cold and moist quality, or in which catarrh is present, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this, it is not advisable to use those things, and on the heads of which painful conditions are present.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is lying on his back be soothed; and for that reason, you must tell the blower to place his hand slightly on the parts where the suction cup has been removed, lest there be a lack of soothing.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The application of suction cups (ventozacio) on the knees is in place of phlebotomy of the deep vein and the basilic: and thereby it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the throat, scission of the air muscles, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the suction cup on the knees be slightly removed, for if it remains in place, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the suction cup application on the head (alhagdahan) confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, inflammation, and tooth root pain; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be sure to instruct the bellows-handler not to press his hand during the scarification so as not to puncture the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The bellows should be used to apply alcohol to the mouth, and it is effective for gingival corruption and similar conditions in the mouth, serving as an alternative to phlebotomy with a knife, which is done on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the use of the bellows on both scalpes should bring about a headache, which is achieved by applying heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the application of the bellows from both sides inside the armpits brings about the effect of phlebotomy on three veins, specifically the basilic, femoral, and temporal veins; these veins are chosen because they draw blood from all the more easily accessible veins in the flesh, as well as the smaller veins found among the larger ones, until the attraction is achieved for the three mentioned veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the bellows to not over-blower in the incision, for the area is denuded of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows which is blown over openings and applies pressure to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to pus ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should instruct the bellows to be a strong one, and of iron, for the area requires a firm section; and its powerful blows should be subtle and performed at an incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The smaller bellows used for minimal incisions produce a gentle flow that draws the blood from throughout the body, alleviating old pain in the joints and kidneys, and the bladder; they stimulate menstruation and relieve breathlessness and coughing; and they are employed instead of lancing blades for two phlebotomies or for hanging the patient, and also for two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these humors weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (or 'ventozas') of the abdomen, the healing is proper to the healing of the vents of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the openings is that it pauses the opening at the beginning visible and sucks gently for a short time, and does not prolong the position of the openings, but rather makes some lighter, and retains others tightly, so that the humors come to the place by natural occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and the pain of the wound appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man whose flesh is tender, take care to scarify him once and not again, so that the place does not become an ulcer.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bellows to increase the scarification and make it deeper, and facilitate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein is great, then take care to scarify twice, for the first time opens the way for the subtilization of the vein and its liquidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make the third scarification so that you achieve its final outcome.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the vein little by little or in small pieces, a single scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we wish to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deep enough.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term 'scarification' refers only to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is large, hard, rough, and its pores are very tight, then the places where the suction cups should be placed must be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, you can use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed almond oil, or oil from the seeds of a dandelion; and if it is in winter, then use buttercup oil, or lilac oil, or chamomile oil, or mint oil.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, sticky, then use oil of ambergris, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be forbidden from oil, and at these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions, or with water heated by the sun, or with water from a cistern, or with wine, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And the one whose leech has a significant amount of moisture, washes their leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac berries, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are significant, wash their leeches in old wine or in water with sage, or licorice root, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before a bath; rather, it should be administered shortly after the bath, for one or two hours, and the leech should sleep nearby.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has been bled is irritable and has severe pain and inflammation, then he should take measures to counteract coldness, such as with milky herbs, and also use things like vinegar, alum, and lemon, and similar ones.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should abstain from their meals as well, such as poultry and meat from young animals, seasoned foods, and things similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in large quantities of warm beer made from fennel and aniseed, and sumac, and other sweet-smelling herbs between meals; and it is recommended that he limit his drinking and eating, abstaining from poultry, lamb, pigs, and small birds, and pigeon.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And during ventilation and phlebotomy, it is necessary to drink more liquid than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to give some men a light diuretic such as altharac, or musk medicine which is masted, or alcelite before ventilation or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is eased; and it is not necessary for them to take that scorching.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the vents that are sacrifice should be vents that are paused over the liver, and on the belly and podagra, and on the navel, in places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not suffer sacrifice upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those for the attraction of pain from a member, thus with paused ventilation over the breast in the malautia (illness) of the flow of pain from the pain of the nose; and they use that for it to dissolve the tight ventilation trapped within the member, similarly as paused over the belly and navel; since it rarifies the member and scales it off and removes the pain as it resolves the ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And now it is placed over the hemorrhoids when they occur in their seat or position, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the hemorrhoid and eradicates it from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems that when it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, it should be done with great caution in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these vents (or openings) are managed with suction only, and sometimes they are managed over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are managed full of hot water for the ailments of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the vent (or opening) is filled and pus forms, it is done with only hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a ventose administered over fire: the size of the orifice should be two fingers in diameter, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid should be the size of a palm; and in the width of it, at the place where it is in the circuit, half of it, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use a cloth soaked in vinegar, lemon, salt, and water, with thick margins, to prevent the member from changing position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place across it a piece of iron or wooden verge, where a candle is held over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventose is larger than the one we have used before, and its size depends on the illness and the condition of the patient using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventoses for children and the weak are different from those for young people and those with strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this swelling with fire on the member is to extend the meche with fire from a decent piece of wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse spur in the exact spot of the swelling, so that the fire is ignited around the area to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Once the swelling is thoroughly stopped over the patient's member, as we have mentioned, when the hot steam passes over that spot, the swelling will be quickly dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And keep applying the fire according to its manner, and repeat it if needed from that point.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	A vacuum can also be applied to the pleurisy patient, without any transverse spur or point, and it should only be filled with water and stopped over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this bellows, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in all members but only in those where it is not possible to place bellows, due to their smallness, such as the tongue and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and its akin.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments that are in the infected water pools.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is appropriate to lay them in the water during the day and night until they are harmless, and do not cause any cause in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleubotomy and bellows; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place a cushion on top of it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and dressed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to clean the area with a gentle breeze, it may be more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the area with hot water and then apply warm compresses; it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the fever persists and the swelling of the veins decreases, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water, and place it on top until the sweating subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the fever has spread, you should apply powdered vitriol (a substance used for its astringent properties) or similar substances from stiptics, as long as the fever is drained; or place hot fava beans on the area to reduce the swelling, and leave them until the beans adhere to the skin, and the fever is broken.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary, apply bleeding, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited, then the place should be rubbed with a fresh wound or left with a needle in the place until it heals; and once they are healed, any sudden pain will disappear.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to open, sprinkle some aloe vera, salt, or ash on it and then gently press.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of recovery from the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mentioned frequently in medical arts; it deals with the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time did not study the books of the Ancients or read even a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it happens that this manner of knowledge on Earth in our time is neglected; and you should not forget it at any time soon; nor have I devoted myself to it later, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, as long as I could extract science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have dedicated myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And here I have described in this chapter everything that constitutes my knowledge and about which I have gained experience; so that from now on others can benefit from it and be spared the trouble of expanding it; I have condensed it to its essence at the end of explanation; and I have presented it in the form of clear explanations at the end of description; and I have outlined in it various forms of the tools that are administered for treatment, as has been explained earlier in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The sum and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those whose mention is necessary before we begin the remembrance of wounded members and the various ones of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the sums of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which, at the beginning, the artisans are forced and obliged to stop on the truth of those; it is for you and for those who are prompt and know or learn this noble art from no one else but you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, it is said that when an accident happens with a fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you must immediately consider starting with fleubotomy or separating that part, or in most cases, if no other cause prohibits, with the debility of virtue, or as the situation demands, whether it is the moment of violent heat or violent friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then, be content in your diet with herbs, fowl meat, and crabs; prohibit thick meats and any food that fills the veins with moisture, as long as you are careful from gangrene, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original position, as it was at first, by correcting what usually goes wrong with them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to abstain from foods that are rich in nourishing substance, of great quantity and weight, such as foods prepared with fat, and rice, bread, meat, beef, veal, fresh fish, large vegetables and similar foods, and at this stage a light and gentle diet brings about the coagulatio (healing) of the fracture more quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones in old men and the infirm are prone to crumbling and cannot be maintained or consolidated according to their nature due to the withering of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are maintained and consolidated according to their nature as long as there is withering of those members, and they remain continuous and consolidated only at the end of winter, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends regarding the broken bone from any cause resembling gout in which there is inflammation that adheres and strengthens that part so that it becomes constantly glued together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as with fire at the beginning, unless some cause does not prevent it from performing its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the patient's food, food that has weight and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures varies according to the diversity of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of a bone in the leg is different from the fracture of a bone in the head, and the fracture of a bone in the foot is distinct from the fracture of a bone in the arm, and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now, I shall proceed to translate each line as requested:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures may occur within it.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified in their species; for there is the curved fracture and another that occurs in them stars [bones?]; and sometimes it is fractured according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the stage and astels (a type of bone?) and additional ones proceeding and not, as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and there is fracture by plague and disruption on the head, and small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own art or torment in restoration according to the memory of its distinctive location.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how bone fracture is known: it is the curvature of it, and that prominence and estimation according to feeling, only when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no deformity or injury evident when touching the bone and the malady does not cause great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may be a deformity or a slight fracture, so you must use your hand and compression over all of it; then apply the remedies that come to mind at that moment, suitable for the location, and make it very tight due to the subtle strain.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that if the location is curved and does not split into two or any other thing that does not happen in it naturally, when the entire part of its counterpart is dislocated, then you must begin with your hour (presumably referring to a specific treatment time or method) to rectify the position, carefully applying cauterization where it has become infected.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If it has become infected with apostema, then leave it for a few days until the infection ceases; and afterwards, bind it in any way you can using materials that aid healing and prevent further damage.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and stitching of an intestine is easier than the operation on bone where it has become infected.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then, as soon as the memory of pain comes, it will strengthen itself.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is deeply infected, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, either of the hand or foot; or use a cushion if the member is small; or use two bands or one band and a pad.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position should be such that you place the member in its natural position, while the parts are extended from the broken member; then perforate so as to make those additions return to their places, using whatever means you can in these locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful, according to your strength, that you do not harm the patient with your operation or cause any injury; and perforate yourself according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure that at this opportune time you apply your hand to it, and if you notice any different cause, rectify it and swallow it down with the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid extreme stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause post-operative aphthae with their manipulations, or lead to contractions in the member, as we have seen this occur through the operations of their misguided attempts.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then attach, achieve proper alignment and careful operation, and provide rest and tranquility to the patient. Warn them about this and make them squint to prevent any strain on that part during their vigils and sleep, and observe its movement and agitation. You must take over its management and attend to all of its movements with all your virtue. Wait until the position of the member is such that it is assured from pain or injury, which is usually caused when the patient feels discomfort in the disposition of the member's position; then change it to another position where no pain is felt. And be careful that the placement of it is straight and sound so that no deformity occurs in the member during its restoration.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members that are torn are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, like the arm and its bone structure, and resemble those, when you see that the envelopment should be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thick like the skin or leg, you should ensure in such cases a complete and hard envelopment, because the tight binding connects the large member and makes it firm from every side, so that nothing enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, carefully release your grip, place a suitable pause on it, over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps depending on the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then I apply that to the beginning of the part most superior of the fracture location, and tighten gently so as not to affect your tightness which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then I slightly elongate the envelopment around the fracture location, gradually softening the tightness little by little, until you obtain from the location a great opening.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then I take another bandage and wrap it around the other side, over the fractured area, as a new envelopment; and I check the envelopments that are most distant from the fracture; and your operation is on the tightness of the envelopment and its softening according to what we said about the first envelopment.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then I place between the wrapping bands of cloth or leather, which have been adjusted to match the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not place any cause on them.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand on the other side, and wrap these sterile bandages decently around it, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and apply pressure where the abscess is and where there is inflammation; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of various types of canvas, skillfully made; or of wood; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, be aware that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thick and wide compared to the other bandages, and its length according to the measurement of the limb in terms of magnitude and smallness; then tighten the bandages on the other side as per your initial assessment; wrap it nicely from above according to the stricture we have mentioned, and remember that your stricture should be more pronounced in the area of the fracture, and the tighter it is, the further it extends from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And take care that the threads are of appropriate thickness and fineness, and numerous; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in certain operations where the thread of cords is twisted, it is a great error when the constriction is not uniform.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired constriction, and you will not realize that there is less than a finger between one thread and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient's condition is aggravated by the extremities of the bones, then apply constriction at these sites, using a thread or twisted wool between them, as long as it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fracture is like a plague, causing disruption in the chain, and you will recall it as mentioned in the second chapter according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely severed limb is not immediately bound to a splint on the first day; this is because when the member is large, it cannot be immobilized with a splint right away but must await a few days, or seven or ten, according to your confidence in avoiding gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting as a quick means of restoring a fracture, especially suitable for complex cases and primarily for women and children, because it does not allow heat or friction: take flour dust, the core of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that is not possible, then use a thin and flexible splint made from the husk of a seed, and do not make it too thick or rigid; and use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare a paste from asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, mirra and aloe vera in equal parts, alcohol in double the amount, and mix with enough albumen or egg white if the patient's condition allows; then apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plastering method that helps with fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alum, dragon's blood, mirra, aloe vera, acacia, and Armenian bole in specific proportions.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients should be mixed in a mortar with strong pressure, then strained, and combined with water or egg albumen, and administered accordingly.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method for plastering and separating joints and bones from their locations, causing accidental pain in these and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool and immerse it in hot wine and oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not suitable for restoration, it prevents abscesses carefully and expels pain specifically.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for plastering that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppies that grow wild; mix them all together to make a plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method for a quick plaster used after bone fractures and when you want an immediate solution for abscess swelling: take roots of aloe, chamomile flowers, violets, and whole grain flour; mix them all together and add hot wine; if the member is not burned, apply it to the affected area.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that with cold water from mint or cold water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a strong poultice for resolution after the first, when a hard abscess occurs, is to prepare from fennel seeds and balm, and melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, any other herbs; all are crushed and mixed with sage water or rosewater or vinegar, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not say in his work that it should be placed over the affected member before its restoration unless a specific preparation of wax and oil is made, and he recommends a balance between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A guinea fowl can be used as a poultice over the broken member after its restoration and for causes of excessive heat, just as myrrh, ash, and similar substances are used for those conditions we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster to an injury and alleviating pain: take half a pound of chamomile, and some nettle leaves or hen's feet, and other herbs, all finely chopped; mix them together, and make a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the sprain and its displacement; if there is no pain or swelling, nor is a bone broken, then it is not worth dislocating it, for you should not apply excessive force.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if a severe pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the site, then immediately remove or dislocate that part, and stop applying the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and a sponge from the sea, which is still moist, and submerge them in boiling water until they are hot; apply this to the area where the swelling and pain persist; let the member rest for an hour; then cover it with a cloth soaked in wine or rose oil, and wrap it up for another night, ensuring there is no risk of infection, and allowing time for the inflammation of the member to subside and the pain to be alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that delicate constriction and apply a small plaster to it without tightening it with your initial restriction, and treat it gently until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, pain, swelling and all the other symptoms have subsided, and you feel the need for a plaster and constriction, then repeat the process as you initially began.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no such cause occurs in the member as we have said, then do not remove the plaster for three to four or even seven days; and sometimes it is left for up to 20 days, according to your judgment, based on the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and nears the coagulation of the flesh over that area.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and regulate the diet of the patient according to the healing process.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you find the location of the fracture already dried and weakened, do not cover it, for then you know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that part; so always moisten it with lukewarm water every time you touch it; and do this for all three days; slightly relieve the tightness, and by this operation direct the nutrition to the limb, and healing will begin.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But here what the foolish restorers of a limb fracture do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to its covering, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon, he would enlarge the wound in his free moments and cure it by turning it over.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them doing this, so it is all the more reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, as do their causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that completely shatters the bone within its joint, leaving the bone separated, just as it is in a broken limb; this type is called compound. Other times, space cuts through a portion of the bone, slicing through its flesh and not extending the cut into the rear of the bone; this fracture is known as absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the affliction of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and they can be caused by compression or traction; their cause is a blow or sudden impact upon a hard surface, and they resemble each other in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, bringing the pancreas close to the bone, or it occurs on the surface of the bone. The affliction of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a fracture that is seized in the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture that occurs either by accident or by the impact of a stone and resembles, when it happens in the concave part of the bone, what also occurs in the ery (ribs) when they are fractured due to impact, and it is the breaking of their entry into the depths.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is most commonly found in the bones of children, as well as in adults.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractures, the bones are often separated like stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then you should return to all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have learned all these types of fractures by observing their appearances and by examining their attempts, as well as the rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	This capillary is known for being discovered over the bone when it is exposed, and it is cleaned, and pressed upon it, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginning of the patient's illness, and if you examine their symptoms that indicate by their signs manifest to evil, such as vomiting from anger or excess, and extension, and loss of consciousness, and fainting, and acute fever, and excretion of pus, and redness of those affected, and similar symptoms in the major dispositions, it is then not considered healthy.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you perceive non-corrupt symptoms, then you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is when the affliction comes upon you at the beginning as it does, and this occurs in winter days, then know that you must study the bone's skeleton from the 13th day according to your disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during summer days, then know that you must watch the bone against the 7th day, because what is left of the bone is corrupted by the pannicul, and accidents occur that we have discussed.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pannicul covering the brain, and it is in small and torn pieces, then know that you must incise the fractured and torn part as I have told you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you cut open the patient's thigh, and discover the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the shape of the plague, and it should be lighter over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you accidentally injure yourself and notice bone fracture, pus or abscess, immediately oppose it with something that covers, and fill the place with bandages soaked in wine and rose oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumferance of the bone and removal of the abscess.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is the second of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one method is that you cut the bone with a straight saw, and this is its form: Then administer another saw slightly wider than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer a yet wider saw than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should choose the number of saws necessary, some of which are wider than others; and some are shorter, ending in a sharp point, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their help to facilitate the incision without harming the head or injuring that person.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and dense, be careful that you do not perforate its circumference before using the scalpel, which are called non-penetrating cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this way but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone in that place to which it should be brought, so that at the cut's edge or margin on that side which leaves the head sharp, resembling a small circle or margin, which prevents submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each one adapted to the specific nature of each bone, provided that in all parts of the skull where the edge is sharp, you consider both its length and brevity according to the quantity of this sharpness on that part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three types of treatments: When puncturing the circumference of a broken bone, place the treatment over the bone and rotate it within your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the treatment to another location and place it where it best reaches the thickness or surrounding area.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with scissors what is between any part of the bone, creating a thin gap that you can close with levitation, as we have said, in order to heal the bone, or with your hand, or using any other instrument that you have prepared for this purpose, such as pincers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to take great care that the scissors do not touch any part of the healing.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So, once you have punctured the bone and it is separated from the healing if it continues to protrude, remove it, taking care to scrape and smooth it against the roughness of the bone with an instrument resembling scissors, but be sure that this one is more delicate and finer than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you break any part of the small bones or joints, take it with ease, for this is what you must do with your instruments; then apply a cure to the wound using liniments and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which has been praised by the Gauls and lauded for great merit; this is how it is spoken of: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and evident, until you have discovered that part and paused with the tip of this cutting tool, which is lent and gentle, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts ahead in length, thus when you have done; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut that is incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then carefully strike over the incision of a limb with a small mallet until you have completely split the bone, ensuring that the panicle (or membrane) does not tear in any way that you might fear, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of his companions; certainly, he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If, however, any cause related to the membrane of the bone arises in certain places, then make an incision on that part with a curved knife, and split it open easily as it is loosened from its attachment, for it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is detached or left on the bone is the face of it, containing roughness and subtle veins, then smooth those rough spots and eradicate those veins with delicate razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply to every part the most suitable ones from among them and the most correct according to how your operation unfolds with that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And take care to administer in your treatment the reason why the bone begins to swell from those cuts, and then use it on the subtle pus of it, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach administering the heavenly pus and the subtle pus of all these.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small breaks or subtle cracks, take care to administer treatment according to what you find to be necessary for its rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is cause that it is not maintained regarding all those which have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us focus on what we have written regarding major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus (fatty tissue) is retracted when you reduce the bone, then take a piece of cloth from it according to the size of the wound, immerse it in heated oil, and place that over the wound; and take another piece of cloth, either doubled or tripled, immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place that over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to harm the skin; and then apply a poultice with linseed oil, and do not strain it unless the wound requires more.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the healing process; then remove that and administer medicines as needed, such as raisin juice, flour of almonds, powder of herbs and aristology, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this powder from the aforementioned medicines, which is sprinkled on the wound when dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicine of the right kind that helps and does not harm.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not put any impurity such as ointment or other; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is attached to the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and destroys it, and brings about a malignant evil to the illness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head's bone when it is cleansed, and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and becomes darker on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if it happens to the illness the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is harmful to all skill.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen due to a blackness caused by the medicine placed upon it, but rather due to that very medicine, then take some honey and finely ground olive oil in equal parts, and apply those liniments to the affected area; then place a cloth over it and keep pressure until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather two fragments that are very close together, or one of those small bones, since it has two bones in it, and the fragment that remains is cartilaginous, not broken, and it does not suffer damage but rather inflammation, deformity, and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two fragments is broken, then you must insert a small piece inside its nose and hold that fracture together from within with the help of a suitable instrument, and outside with a bandage, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done for your ease, and be careful not to cause pain through your operation on the patient's illness.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not heal properly, then cover it so that it is even with the edge of the crack where there is swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And open the fracture for restoration on the first day of its occurrence if possible; otherwise, gently apply heat or cold for eight days to rest the affected area carefully.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of clean cloth in the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if it's in two parts, ensuring that the swelling fills up the nasal cavity completely.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And so I say some of the ancient remedies that the joints should be bathed in a border, and changed throughout the day, which is not seen by me; once I understood that the joint should be immersed in egg albumen mixed with flour powder; then apply the bath until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes they are wrapped in the nose with lint wrapped in lion's cloth; and it is that you already have a broken nose, very painful, and the malady does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it this way, and if you wish, do it with baths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another case of post-hemorrhage occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or paste made from vinegar and olive oil, or with a mixture of them.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not prevent the development of gangrene, then cover that external area with flour of sesame and powder of crushed herbs mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it, pressing firmly, and do not allow air to reach it for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or cracked, then you must carefully cut them and extract the fragments with suitable instruments; then, using a scalpel, make incisions and cure it with what is appropriate and consolidate it, and apply suitable bandages.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must carefully cure it with warm compresses and insert platinum tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter IV.**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**On the Restoration of the Mandible when Broken.**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only external, and not divided into two parts and bent inward, then its judgment is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right index finger; and with that, gently push the fragment of the fracture inward to facilitate its separation outside, while your other hand holds the part outside the fracture. Do this carefully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, whenever it is possible to achieve their reduction.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concusion of teeth leading to their displacement, then use those of which you expect them to remain in place by means of gold or silver or silk thread; and apply pressure over the broken mandible carefully; and apply pressure over it with a doubled cloth, and a large sterile drape cut appropriately, or a piece of sole leather matching the length of the mandible; and then secure it as you are equipped for its ligature and as the application is appropriate, without damaging it.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And instruct the patient to rest and be calm, and withhold food from them until their thirst is quenched.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you notice that the shape has changed in any way on the third day, then carefully and gently remove the bandage, correct what has been altered, and apply a powder made from wheat flour, or egg white, or sesame flour, as you have kept the skin moist with oil, and place a woolen cloth over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And after you have applied and adjusted this plaster over it, and the arrangement of the bone is not disturbed, leave it there until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for these fractures usually heal tightly within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another acute abscess occurs, then follow the treatment described above until it heals, and thoroughly clean that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a serious issue, consider whether it involves a broken bone or dislocated joints, then you must be subtle in treating those dislocations with what is appropriate for their removal from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, you should widen them with a flebotomy according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have adjusted those dislocations, and they do not remain displaced, then with the opening of the wound widened, if it is necessary, place a plug; otherwise, apply pressure over that one of the splints appropriate to it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	It appears that there's an incomplete sentence or section marked "Capitol .v." without preceding text for context. Without additional content, it's challenging to provide a meaningful translation or interpretation. If this is part of a larger text, please provide the surrounding sentences or context for a more accurate response.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula (a term often referring to the splint or brace used in medieval medicine) when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the bones of the joint are broken, the fork of the partition in front of the muscle is fractured, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not cause additional injuries; it is less prone to restoration; or it happens in such a way in it that it causes difficulties in restoring it; or the fracture is like a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is its most severe, it is necessary to have two assistants present, so that one has the adjutor and holds the broken fork, while the other extends the leg at the partition.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then reduce the fracture with the ties within it according to its form, and not in its prominency or convexity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, wait until the cushion of the patient is covered with cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your need; then extend and raise the fork and shorten the thread with your hand as you swallow the tear as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the fork to the desired length, as it is bent on reaching its goal, then wait until the patient's hernia is lifted onto his chest, and place a cushion halfway in size over his muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the attendant should press the patient's muscle from behind until the fork's bone is raised and in its place, then you straighten the fracture and hold it with your hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any stiffness in the fork and it is uncomfortable, then wait until you break through it and extract those threads with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is trapped in the bone, you will make an incision of it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument used to dislocate, aside; and this is the shape of the instrument:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles a cup in which this is the concave part; and its size is according to what you need it for, whether it's for a large or small bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; as there are two ends, one should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound of the disruption that you have made when extracting the fragment from the bone is wide and there is a safe space between the edges, then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is minor or you fear a serious infection, use a clean cloth and poultice according to the extent of the wound's disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, inject a mixture of hot vinegar and olive oil, and place a cloth over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the pain and swelling are severe around a fracture, apply a paste made of flour and egg albumen, place a hot compress over it, and then wrap it tightly with a cloth. If necessary, use a long, thin needle to drain excess fluid, and repeat this process daily. Envelop the affected area in a thin wooden splint and secure it with cloth. When the swelling subsides, remove the splint and bandages, ensuring the fracture is healed.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the bone is not completely shattered; and so that you can see the injury each day, if the ligament becomes soft or you notice the star (scab) already formed, then you should correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then hold the patient's sleep (or rest) over their collarbone, and place a small cushion beneath it to ensure their sleep during the night; so that by that, the assistants of the patient from both sides are elevated towards that part, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised with the muscle; or it is the patient's arm bent at the collarbone.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless it happens to be in the adjacent or infected area, within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see the state of the patient towards it, adjust in the tightness, restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is healed and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and supported according to the most severe in 28 days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the shovel is broken in the lateral part of the patient, but it is not completely severed, only the edges are damaged.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the part is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of the patient — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape with all possible skill.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a powdery mixture of salt and honey on the wound; and apply a stopgap with a double cloth; and place a thin table knife beside it according to the entire amount of the shovel or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the plate is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a soft material to level it.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly with the tongue, using a constrictive motion and maintaining the stability of the plate so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the consistency each day; whenever it becomes softened, repeat the process of tightening and adjusting the plate if it moves from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And watch over the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the plate should be restored in 10 days or 25th day.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the binding, and know for certain that it is from among the bones whose origin is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the sternum's cartilage of apoplexy cauter if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	**Capitol VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of Fractured Bones.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the bone breaks in the middle of its location and it takes time for it to heal; more often, its ends are healed and fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the accidents of the bone when its middle part breaks, it declines to move inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be placed between their thighs; then press upon their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the two sides of the ribcage, delicately perform the operation upon them, and apply the treatment in every way possible that is appropriate for it, so that the bone structure returns to its original state.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin board of linden wood or similar, covering it with cloth; delicately wrap this around the broken bone without causing further harm; periodically adjust the bandage according to the curvature of the spine, and tighten it gently; constantly consider the bandage throughout the process, and when it softens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it becomes necessary to trigger the discharge of any corrosion, pressure, or pain that occurs at the site, then cut and remove the bandage, and eliminate the plaster, correcting what has happened due to this in a manner conducive to the patient's healing; adjust the bandage as needed; and maintain stricture until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly but in places where they attach to the spine; and the ends of their joints do not cause pain to those parts unless there is inflammation because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not concealed from sensation, you must inquire about it through its signs.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it heals the fracture as well, according to its type, within the limits of what is possible; it should be swallowed, if appropriate, and then a plaster applied to strengthen the broken bone, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the openings inside, it causes severe pain and piercing for the patient, just as much as a puncture that occurs to someone who has pleurisy, and due to this, the rib fractures press upon the lung; it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ancients have ingeniously devised that magical plant.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them, they say: cover that prevents the patient from consuming food that causes inflammation and gas, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the rupture is pushed out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should avoid this at all costs so that it does not cause a slight wound to generate an abscess, if it happens; and if it already has, then help it immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also say that certain things should be applied to reduce inflammation and, immediately after, something that sucks out the swelling; and it seems reasonable, yet it is feared that the inflammation may cause excess fluid to accumulate due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also say: cover the area with cloth that has been previously soaked in hot oil, and place pillows between the ribs until it is filled, compressing it according to its shape; and it is treated for the patient's illness using both food and medicine for pleurisy.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the illness causes violent constriction that does not yield, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the illness, then cover it, uncover the broken ribcage, and place your hand over the area to preserve the integrity, recalling the procedure that facilitates the extraction, and remove that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if the two lips of the wound are large, they should be sewed shut, and it should be treated with plaster until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, you should cut it open and apply poultices in warm oil over the area, and treat the illness with what covers the abscess from within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be elevated on the side upon which they sleep, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	**Chapter IX.**
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can be fractured and their tissue damaged, resembling the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or strain those parts, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they feel no pain, then you know that they will not recover, and in such a state of weakness, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel constriction and pain from pressing or piercing the affected area, then know that the bone's nerve is intact and that the ailment will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if they will heal, consider their weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that the body part has already become soft, apply heat to where it occurred in the joints, and when you sit on your legs, they gain flexibility and mobility is restored, but sometimes it happens that he lies down on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is a serious condition, and therefore do not attempt to treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no specific cause occurs for those conditions, the mild cause is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is that you make incisions at the relaxation of the abscess with a cauterized iron, or with oil from roasted sole, or with vinegar; place this on that area several times a day until the abscess of the cauterized iron is calmed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now, place a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it around that area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain is felt until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If a fracture of the shin bone or any other cause separates a part from the body, then cover it with a dry compress and place that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, either by suturing if necessary; and treat it with care to prevent the formation of a scar, as long as it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of the tibia bone breaks and it is the end of the leg, then insert your left hand's thumb into the wound, and with your other hand, hold the broken bone in place as if possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if these are needed, and tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones inside it, then press on that area, hold the affected part, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the wide [or perhaps 'the wide one', referring to a hernia or intestinal protrusion].
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hernia are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is nothing but communication to the ends of those parts and are sharp in length and decline inward; and it causes pain for the patient in that place and punctures, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the end of it and only there, then you should envelop that part according to what you have been taught by experience in a manner similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or it already declines inward towards its parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have bound it all up, apply the plaster to it, and then place over that a strip of wood or canvas, tighten it firmly with no fear of breaking or removing the stitch.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And bind the concavity so that it fills the space between them as they assume the position, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If there is a risk of infection after the extirpation of the abscess, cease further treatment and allow the abscess to heal until it is safe, then apply what was previously described; and then return to completing the healing process, tightening it securely as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there is damage to the bones or they are broken, then handle them as needed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the assistant (or possibly, the bone).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori refers to the area between the thigh and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a flat piece of rough wood according to this form...
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And it should be tied at both ends of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Then continue the treatment on a side; and pull out their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the middle point of its curve, where it is attached to the wood.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the physician should extend this to the parts below; and the surgeon must put his hands on the fracture, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient be turned over on their back and raise their chest with one hand, while the other minister holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the purulent discharge from below them; and each of them extends themselves according to their ability.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with ligatures and over the other ligament as well; and each of the two ministers extends themselves in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is near the extremity of a muscle, then you should bind that half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then you should bind the ligament at that location and over the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse this in easy water and its work will be facilitated; and when it is immersed according to the depth and properly applied, tighten it carefully if there is no risk of ulceration.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If there is a risk of ulceration, leave the compression loose for the first seven days, and place a woollen cloth soaked in vinegar and rosin on it to stop the apostema, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on this assistant, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And remove the cloth and tighten it on the arm assistant to keep the arm in place without any movement if there is no cause for pain in the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that stem which is both wider and stronger than the other stems; and between each stem you set the width of your hand, and the length of the stems according to the break plus three parts from the whole.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten the stems with the tension or tightness that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the tension or tightness over the site of the fracture should be more severe.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the further away the fracture is, the less tension or tightness is required.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore, depending on the position of the stems and the tension as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its normal situation, then you act accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and the strings within on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And afterward, consider the dressing on all wounds for three days to prevent occurrence of pressure or inflammation; or restrict food from reaching the affected member due to excess tightness; and thus rectify everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that no further cause will arise, do not loosen the binding but leave it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest from the malady should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a hot compress filled with wool on the injured member, and consider at all times of night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing become soft; thus rectify it entirely according to your ability.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And now hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that the food is gentle at first until it begins to tighten; and then you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the assistant and the leg support is that they should be tightened for 10 days, and you will notice that they become loose and should be given baths and treated with ointments that correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is old and infected, then you should not loosen the ligament and stitches for more than one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of arm fractures.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus; of which one is small, and is what is known as the little arm, and the other is large and is supported below the small one, extending upward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger or smaller fragment of the bone is broken, they are usually split at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller fragment of bone is broken above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone fragment below is broken in such a way as to cause a fracture, it is difficult to heal.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is worse when two bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fragment above, it is easier for the doctor to restore it, as its small size allows for greater ease in realigning it before it heals.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the larger fragment is what is broken, then it requires greater extension to correct it.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are simultaneously torn open, be careful that you press the extraction with much greater force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And be careful that you maintain the position of your hand for the restoration of it and the extension of it spread over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be elevated above all others, more than any other joint, and the pain should be centered on a well-prepared cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place another cushion in front of him at an elevated or upright position, so that the pain does not shift and work its way around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then have the minister extend the arm from the joint more below towards their hand or ligament, and another minister extends above it in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bone within that reduces according to the best figure possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are adhesions, then you must completely remove all pain to its proper place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separation in it that affects the tendon and is not expected to restore itself, then you must finish with it and hold it as we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe, having already reached this special chapter, then take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if there occurs an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line it with a cloth made of oil and wax, acting with moderation between strength and gentleness, and tighten the cloth tightly over that small space until the abscess subsides; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powder of fine clay, and place stars; and let the star be the one that is positioned over that fracture both further and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fragments together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater force and intensity, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or around the lower parts of it increases, lessen the pressure slightly more gently according to how the patient's pain subsides at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to tighten them should be of moderate thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament over several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, and as the pain occurs in the member, then cover it with a water-filled pouch until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unrestricted until it rests, then gradually apply compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the compression is already softened and the bone has healed and appears like those before, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is blocked from reaching the limb due to excessive compression, then you must gradually soften that area and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows to it again, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not have any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hold the patient's hand with your skill to limit their restless movements, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the arrangement of the parts and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	**On the Restoration of Rib Fractures and Dislocations**
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that rib fractures and dislocations of the joints often occur due to sudden movements, and not because of their inherent weakness.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a rib fracture or dislocation occurs, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and lies with the affected area elevated, thus preventing further pain and discomfort. Then, place your hand over the area affected by the fracture or dislocation.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them so that they are correctly positioned together.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you should apply a plaster and stopgap, lest an infection occur; and then place a bandage from above according to the extent of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the deeper parts near the belly of the palm, then make it similar to a piece of cloth, and command the patient to clench that on the fractured part of their palm; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it tightly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bandage of cloth should be lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and then tighten it according to what is needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in external parts, then you should place a bandage on it and another bandage at the side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and directed; and then tighten the tightness, thus as the hand is moved to its normal position between the joints.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you experience a fracture in any of the bones of the hand, if it is the thumb, it should be splinted according to its position and secured tightly with the palm facing up, and if desired, place a small right-angled pin to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other bones of the hand, such as those in the middle finger, or index, or little finger, it should be splinted across the affected digit; or all fingers can be tied together according to their sequence, which is better; or a small pin can be placed over it, just as we have said about the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and return that, the order of abscesses, cauterize and oppose - with your surgical skill - what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described iteratively in its narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, revealing itself according to how it turns into the fracture and the surrounding swelling.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament left on the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends the ligament to its full length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary to open the thigh, then its ligament should be extended towards the opposite side of the pelvis, so that the extension has room, and another ligament left on the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture seems to be severe, then make the appropriate ligament fasten to the bone, and extend it to the neighboring parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should align both bones in their proper position as they reduce the fracture, according to the natural appearance of the bone, and the bone is united by a good joint. Be careful to apply poultice and compression, otherwise the member may become gangrenous.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If gangrene occurs in the member, then leave it for several days until the gangrene subsides, and afterwards resume your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be applied as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of linen between the thigh and the leg near the groin, bringing the ends of the linen from both parts superior to the two parts, and then fold over the leg and thigh what is superfluous of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture as well, and use one stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the thigh and leg with soft rags, so that the tightness is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong constriction around the middle on the site of the fracture using three or four turns, and as you move farther away from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the linen to the other parts until it reaches the toe joint, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other part so that the ligament does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the compression over it, ensuring that there is no damage to the affected member, nor gangrene or inflammation and similar things; and if any cause of those arises, then pay attention to its detachment from the body, and rectify what happens immediately, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone due to pressure, then cover that part as best as you can; otherwise, make a cut on it and remove the offending part, and treat the cause that led to the remembrance of the pain until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned with just bandages, as we have said about the aid and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, one should not cause the patient's limp; and if it is restored alone, another method should be applied to the other leg, as it is necessary that the affected limb walk on its own again.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a month or two, and all of this depends on the diversity of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often leads to prolonged pain, and this may result in frequent incidents of constriction.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If such incidents occur with the fracture, it is not only a crack or break in its parts, and this becomes a great pain or these pains, and all of this has been under observation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, and it should be added and joined as much as possible by means of equilibrium and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and press upon that round mark, if it is necessary for it; tighten the bandage around it tightly as required.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus with great care and similar to those that resist any accident that is suitable for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fractured leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the femur; and the other is thin and is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as restoration is made to the arm as a whole; and the operation on them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken at once, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone breaks subtly, the leg is shattered in different ways.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone breaks very thickly, it opens up inside, and is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extension, compression, and compression of the joints according to that agreement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the leg fracture is clean without movements, extension should be less and more gentle, and it will be beneficial to your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is also a cause for operation on the arm, and when you tie the stitches and complete all the surgical procedure, you will take wooden splints from which the causes are suspended in single pieces, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; align them with those that require slight pressure, do not be harsh on the hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from the inside towards the outside.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each drape around the limb in two layers according to its length, placing one at the joint of the leg from one side and the other at the opposite side, ensuring they cover the entire affected area of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then secure the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle, as this structure prevents the limb from bending at the joint, maintaining a stable position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the limb, securing it in place to prevent any further movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is primarily important that you do this in case of a fracture, especially when the pain is acute.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then, each day, examine the limb and study its condition thoroughly, observing for any signs of inflammation or other similar issues. If any such causes arise, promptly treat it with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capital XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus does not suffer a fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer a fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer a fracture, but they do experience wear and tear due to their position and use.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the ground in a way that promotes healing as they recover.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place your foot over what is elevated due to those bones, and apply pressure, and compress, and bind those until they return to their proper place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the abdominal cavity of the foot on a small table with two legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that on the foot with a descending stretch, since you have wrapped it with drapes and other causes of which you are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as the condition passes three or four days, then you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is just as knowledgeable.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if someone says it is broken, then restore those, entangle them as they were and re-align them in your hands during the restoration of the said bones.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place this broken bone straight according to its length and a little on the side; and then put the foot on this table which is already re-aligned, and tighten that with a descending stretch.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken off from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place your hand over each part wrapped in a lion-colored cloth, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an incision into the sole of the foot so that it has a good hold.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is also important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned in other fractures from accidents we have discussed; and be wary of any new accident that may occur.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	**On Fractures of the Hip Bone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bones**
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone is fractured, apply compression with a bandage, incline the patient slightly to one side, and hold them in that position behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the cavity with hot compresses, applying them to the cavity of the patient as is hoped; and the woman is made to tilt her body slightly, lifting the legs one by one, until everything is removed from within, so that it faces the opening of the cavity as is hoped and the broken bone heals.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powders on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them do so easily, collect the urine, reduce it, and return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, then return to their original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and place a tube of canvas over the patient's wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated within the cavity, for the fracture heals.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with a bandage and left for some days, as we have recommended, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and healing the same as we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be overlooked in these close fractures and rarely does it fail, especially to those who have some knowledge and practice this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the best dispositions for your restoration and tightness of the bone. And therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's leg when it is cracked, take a hot compress from above and place it on the limb; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are fractured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture, especially if the bone is large, as is the bone of the thigh or of an appendage, or similar to those that you cauterize and cut immediately if the conditions for flebotomy on yourself or by testimony allow it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection spreads to the sanium (fever), then know that you must cauterize it by binding it with cloth moistened in the third degree of heat, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on the patient within a day or two, and do not prolong it, if otherwise there is no risk of gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you experience an apothema (abscess) cautiously, then leave its restoration within the sixth day, until the apothema subsides, and do not touch it on the seventh, eighth, and ninth days of the month, for you might cause other complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone breaks off prominently at an exposed joint, then cover and protect yourself from perforation as you strive to reduce and immobilize it with your hands in a way that facilitates easy and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is beyond your control and the position of the bone is against your hands, then reduce it using whatever tools you have at hand; a tool made of metal, with a length of approximately seven or eight digits (inches), and a width determined by the amount of damage, is ideal for this purpose. For this reason, a doctor must be prepared to use such tools in various amounts during treatment, depending on the type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be made in such a way that it has a little roughness so that it is not easily bent during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an acute tip at its end, with its margin in its extremities; and the top of it should be slightly curved, extending from within to the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "volentary hernia" in Greek, thus it is a rare case.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the acute end of it is elevated above the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should be done at once before the bone returns to its place, and no operation should be performed.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so try to intertwine the ends of the fracture among them, and if the end of the broken bone is delicate, and you do not seize the instrument with good precision, then you must insert the end of that bone within the instrument's reach.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you are unable to reduce the bone to its proper place using what we have recommended, then cut into it with a scalpel according to what seems necessary to you. Or saw that part of it in any way you can.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then scrape that which is attached to the bone, with rough parts and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels intense pain, you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do this to bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, and you submerge it in a black stippling vinegar, especially in summer, do not place any cloth or other material on the wound, lest it cause decay and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And subsequently, during the final stages of bone restoration, uncover the wound and carefully cut away any remaining debris using scissors or similar tools, and apply bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be extremely careful not to reinjure the wound at the site of the fracture, as unskillful doctors often cause complications, leading to death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unsanitary.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the fracture's tightness is slight, flexible, different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is severe or a bad one, and you are afraid of further complications that we have encountered, and you feel pain in the area, do not press down on it, but rather wrap it tightly with a cloth of hard linen.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when, after one or two days, the plague begins to generate pus in it, then remove from it the cloth that you had placed over the affected area, and apply some treatment, with which we usually treat plagues, such as a poultice or something similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary that you remove the lint and consider the plague each day and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and ensure that the affected member is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it to the surrounding areas with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated or separated from the arm, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to prevent the plague from spreading.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those strategies, the ones that are separated and removed, and the ones that are not separated and involve placing members and causing pain, perforate you to incise those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you encounter a wound or ulcer that is swollen or some other type of corruption and putrefaction, then you must stop each one of them with whatever you deem suitable for the cure of which a description precedes this in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I should say and you present your case: when the flesh is split open, it protrudes over the member as if it were the bone of the thigh and the joints, resembling those of the larger members, and do not attempt to remove it or extract it, as you may cause death; after leaving it alone for a time that it can heal on its own, perhaps 2 or 3 days, then attend to the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of hernias that occur during the healing of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Various complications occur with this hernia during the healing process of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the member; thus, it hinders the normal function of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the hernia is recent and administer those medicines that have been found effective for it, such as aloes, senna, and similar herbs; take some or all of these, and apply those with a stypic quality, or alum, or vinegar, and press them onto the hernia in a stoppered manner, and constrict them firmly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And apply a firm pressure that does not release it for several days; then loosen that and apply another, as long as the hernia persists; or lay a sheet of lead on it, since lead has the property of reducing anything inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is already decided that the stone has become hardened and narrowed due to necessity, then divide it by the most superior part of it, and incise the superfluous and protruding part, or quickly remove it before it hardens again; and treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	**Chapter XXI**
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture: When it is restored, then wrap the delicate and frail member with a cloth according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the delicate member is wrapped, it should not be done for trivial reasons: of which one is the abundance of solution of the ligament and of the binding made not according to rule; or because of excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or because of too much superfluous obstruction; or due to improper movement at an inappropriate time; or because of pus in the body of the patient, and for the debility of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to restrict the patient's diet and make their heart tender while the pain multiplies; administer a bath; insert gauze and apply pleasure to it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply pressure to the member, so that the pressure draws the warm nutrient to it, continuing the application of cold water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the healing of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and surgery is forbidden from them, covering that which should be exposed.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an incident occurs with a member already restored, then focus on healing it from tortuosity and distortion of the broken bone, aiming for the form of the member; however, do not prohibit the natural operation of the member, as long as you receive the permission of the one who considers that member newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many times, one finds foolish doctors and healers who have practiced this on our land; and this operation is much despised, causing great fear at the sign of which it is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the recent loss of mobility and weakness is due to waterlogged joints containing soft herbs, or if they are rubbed with leaves of oak and willow, and similar plants, and then a soothing plaster is applied; or if thick mucilage from willow bark is mixed with hen's eggs or olive oil, and spread as a plaster on top of that; or if fat figs are pressed between the feathers of a goose, imitating those used in certain medical treatments known as consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes, it is dissolved by continuous light friction applied to the most humid areas, and the affected member's movements are encouraged at regular intervals throughout the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already progressed and is severely twisted, turning into a stone, and its necessity for treatment arises from rust in the metal, then it should be observed that pus has formed on top of it and the continuity of the bone has dissolved, and what is superfluous from the pressure of this joint on the metal is cut away with delicate bone scissors, and relief is provided to that part which has been overstretched and strained.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De sermo en dislocacio.	**On Dislocation**
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the body's joints, rendering it immobile and causing the shape of the affected member to be distorted, leading to severe pain and significant injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be treated as soon as possible to ensure the joint is reduced and restored. If treatment is delayed, the area becomes inflamed, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to prevent any additional strain or extension during the amputation process, as movements seen cause spasm and joint pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this occurs, you will notice that you need to perform a flap operation on the patient's injury, and then place it in a position that relaxes the amputation; and the affected member should be soaked in warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the liquid, from which the memory will return to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the joints of dislocation as mentioned in the fracture; starting from the upper part of the body, it descends to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of a dislocated jaw, let us speak.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the two jaws are dislocated due to an injury, it can occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their position with minimal movement, or they are completely dislocated and swollen, preventing the patient from opening their mouth, and the saliva from the wound leaks out, and they cannot hold or close their mouth, and the tongue is wrapped around itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	If the dislocation is slight, it may return to its original position on its own with minimal cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and swollen, it is necessary to immediately administer a reduction of the swelling gently, without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's condition, and the doctor should insert his finger into the opening of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert two fingers simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, keeping the other fingers outside to which they can be attached; and he should order the patient to close their jaws gently until the jaw returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are permanently dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil, until a light reduction of both is achieved and do not delay the reduction of both completely, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they are returned and tied up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of soft cloth over it, treated with wax and olive oil, and this will facilitate the loosening of the bindings.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And have the patient lie on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not moan to the right or left, and do not force them in any way; having fed them sufficiently, then cut their food into small pieces, until the pain is eased and the jaws are unclenched, then they may eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, and excretion, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not restored to their proper places, then fever and continuous vomiting occur, and the patient's belly is severely distended and he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and often the patient dies within a few days of this happening.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the fork (elbow) and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fork (elbow) is not displaced from the socket by its continuation in the arm; however, sometimes it is displaced towards the outside part, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient seeks relief on their bed and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then narrow the opening with your palm tightly closed, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then press down on that compress and poultice, and tighten it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Apply the end of that which dries on the thigh, and continue it to that, so it is not dislocated in any day; then cover that it be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then press down on that compress, poultice, and binding, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this treatment, the cure is reduced to the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that a muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is detached from its origin at the joint.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the insertion of the muscle, and this requires treatment; and it is not dislocated at the rear joints by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front joints by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out at the insertion on the outside, especially in those places where there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there is much muscle, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to certain people through a blow or fall, and the muscle of the limb is inflamed from a severe contusion, and it is squeezed by what has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So now that you understand this regarding the state of being overexerted from him, and you begin to consider his healing process.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of the limb is known when it occurs in such a way that you must remove the covering; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the healthy muscle, since you find among these diversities a manifestation; and you find in the top of the muscle a concavity and place the titillic after touching the top of the muscle just like if one were to press it, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position, nor move it without pain.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle, and you find evident touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, gentle reduction is done when it is fresh and the illness is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the parts above; then he applies gentle pressure from below, and strengthens the joint in its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then he places it so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It may be that what we have said does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, a few days later, it is necessary that the illness be bathed in hot water and administered herbs that soften and relax as if they were cut from nettle, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned so that the dislocation hangs in suspension between relaxation and tension; then the doctor places his hand over the area of expectation, raises the head of the muscle towards virtue, pulls the patient's hand away from the parts below, and another minister holds the patient's head so that it is not pulled from the parts below, for then it will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and do cause to be present a man who is taller than the hernia, and stands on that side, and insert his muscle between the hernia's touch and lift the hernia's touch above its parts until the hernia is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hernia's hand from the parts beneath his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else causes it to be suspended, so that it becomes serious, because the displacement returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced precisely in another manner: and this is that a long stick be placed on the ground with a head shaped like mortar, not too thick or too thin, and then the hernia is placed beneath; as it rests upon the head of the stick, the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and then the hand from above extends towards the parts below the other side; and the body part from the other side is extended with force, because the joint returns to its place at great speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned, use this treatment: take a stick, its length should be about two arms' span, and its thickness should be four digits, and shape it like this:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then cover the head with a round cloth to prevent the stick from touching the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place yourself between the patient and the stick, extending your hand or arm over it within the space left, and position the stick on the assistant, arm, and end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Place your arm on a scale at the correct distance, with your hand extended into the space left, and the other side suspended from the opposite end, so that the joint is within the desired range.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is completed in any way that is possible for you, and you see that you have placed a light, smooth woolen thread; then prepare a paste with powder from the mill, mixed with egg albumen over all the muscle, so that it is turned away from its original position, tighten the thread gently, place the paste over the thread, the patient's hand should be attached to the collar of the bandage, and left for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it should be ensured that the patient's diet is restricted for a short time, as long as the member is comfortable, as it is lighter on the healing of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then the diet should be gradually increased over seven or five days, and if there is no pain or discomfort, it means that he is cured.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs in it or other causes, then you should apply a hot cautery with three parts, as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and compression are reduced on him several times, and it is not held firm and he cannot raise that arm to its normal position, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never stay in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In case of dislocation, the foot and ankle or the joints behind should be reduced by pressure and extension of the muscles, until it returns to its normal position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both the compression and treatment should be applied to that other joint, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing is slow in the member and there is delay in its movements, then the disease uses hot baths several times until that gravity is removed and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated entirely, most notably from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from your sight or touch if some figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this becomes clearly evident to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And take care to reduce the dislocation as soon as it becomes apostemic, because if you see it become apostemic, reduction is difficult and complete healing unlikely; especially when it's in the back parts, as it's worse than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain, and often results in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And for the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, his hand should be extended to two sides, and his arms expanded, and the doctor's hands are on his shoulder and under him, and he presses the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending his hand with his other hand, until it strikes the shoulder with the tip of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and these two assistants hold this view so that there is no relapse in extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arm over all parts, because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth on his hand, or ligature.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it to prevent the causes that lead to its stiffness and facilitate lubrication of the joint, then vigorously massage the joint until it returns to normal.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is pressed upon that paste where there is stiffness and application of white of egg, and be sure to remove any tightness and descending, and let the arm hang from the collarbone, and leave it for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it becomes loose; and so if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not too tight, then you reapply the paste and ligament, and leave it for a few days until it becomes loose; then you loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in a bath and subtle friction, and compression, as long as it is relieved; or apply heat over the affected joint, if it's a case of oily motion; and wrap it up, leaving that over the bone during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then you wrap it up and immerse it in a bath; when it is dry, rub the joint with warm friction, repeating over the affected area until the pain subsides, once, twice, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bath, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, apply a hot, wet compress over the split in the cow's hide and wrap it tightly; do this several times, as it is moistening and returning to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the shoulder can be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate, unlike other joints, but it is essential to act quickly in reducing it as soon as it is displaced, so that the location does not become stiff or that a fracture occurs in it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and make them extend their arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the vicinity of the joint, and gently pushes it back to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider that if the palm has already been placed on the patient's stomach, the patient should then place their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was first noticed in the back of the hand, then the position of the arm should be inherently on the table so that the doctor's hand can work on the vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so return as soon as possible; if not, tighten the compress gently, release the hernia, and leave it be; for if you do not act promptly, the pain will increase and you will not be able to reduce the hernia any further over time.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Although the joint may be frozen due to its stiffness, the disease does not have a clear cause; rather, the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp any object. You should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and there is no pain in it unless it is strained with a hot cautery near its attachment, which gives it some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the condition improves, you should focus on the compress we have applied, leave it in place and tighten it for several days; then loosen it, leave it alone, and exercise your hand over it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some pain occurs, you can relieve it by applying a cold water compress and friction a few times, until it is eased.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the joints become completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated, either in the back of the hand or on the palm, hold the joint tightly and gently push to reposition it, until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the joint, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it is right again on that very day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night falls, according to that second account, do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising movement, and do so at night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is displaced in the mother's womb, attach that to that opening and do the first operation on it until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, do this when it is displaced in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocated spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae or those of the neck, it is often accompanied by severe pain, as the vertebrae are out of their proper position, and at such times, there is no cure, for death can result from the malady.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the removal of the disease is against their will, and they cannot contain it; often, certain members of them or both legs or both arms or one of these become mollified, or a spine from its place is removed, often times, and often times the removal of these to four parts is done.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, when it is removed in these behind parts, it is called gout.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for it is that you consider whether the gout occurs from childhood, because in those cases there is neither a cure nor a complete healing of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where you see it from accident or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients have already spoken of remedies in lengthy discourse, of which the most beneficial returns; but you have perhaps already been frustrated by that which offers little excuse due to its excessive use, for my close proximity to understanding has exposed and shaped me from various tools of that kind, by which I will demonstrate and space out this very issue.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that the inflammation which occurs at the base of the foot, is neither cause nor cure for that part; and it resembles that which is done in two places.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And for those, only the one that occurs on the back itself is cured with this method.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And since the illness has spread over its face, close to the wall, and has extended beneath them great pain so that the chest of the patient cannot be moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then take a straight stick, pause it upright, placing one end on the ground at the foot's extreme near the patient's head, and another stick, with its feet, at the other extreme of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister shall hold the stick, not fixed in a pit; and another minister shall hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then cover the patient's head and leave the thin linen bandage to hold them firm; extend the end of the bandage to the foot which is opposite their head, and tie it there; and tighten the other bandage over their hips, towards the back of their legs, and make it fast to their leg-bandages; and adjust all the bandages and tie those to the other foot.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the bandage towards the joint of the foot, and the two feet and the bandages on their places where they are fixed should not be loosened, but nevertheless they are not tightly bound as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while he waits for it to return, or he may place them on a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall where we have said that the patient's condition is most severe.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, pressing firmly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open it by turning your hand; and since you are standing on the ground, hold the patient's head with two fists, the length of which should be a arm, and place their head firmly in the back of the punch, exactly with two fists; and this is the length that is between each fist and the thumb, and when you make a cut on each fist, it must be deep enough, and each finger should be held firmly on the ground so as not to cause any harm.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another round fist where the turn is, and twist it in both directions of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a punch where the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is turned; and in the other two fists, they are similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot in the wound from which the head of the bone is to be removed, and the ligaments you have tightened on his thighs in the turn where his legs are to be healed.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should have a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor equally ties the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned to its place and the area is tied, cover it with a dry, clean cloth, then stop; then place over the plaster a table from which the width is three or four times the length of the affected area, and the length of it should encompass the spot of inflammation, and on the side of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the remedy we have mentioned, using subtle nutrition of the patient until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any signs of recurrence appear at the site after healing, it is necessary to administer remedies that soften and clean the area with a long-term table treatment, which we have recommended; this is already being administered in the form of lead plaster there.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, imminence occurs at the end of the spine, caused by dislocation; it is that bone which you should be most careful not to expose to this medicine, as it will severely cause death to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter XXXI.**
De curacio de anca dislocada.	**On the Cure for a Dislocated Hip.**
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle should only suffer dislocation, and not what happens to other joints with small removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four manners, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forwardly, or backwardly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forwardly or backwardly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation in the inward parts is that, when you straighten the patient's leg against the illness, it becomes longer, and the inside is more prominent than the outside, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the shin bone; this is where the tongue of the muscle becomes detached from its attachment, so that the head of the muscle is already affected here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which causes dislocation is when parts are separated outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of that which causes dislocation in the front parts is when the leg expands fully but does not bend in the knee; if it perforates and cannot be brought back to the front parts, then the patient's urine is retained and their testicles are swollen, and you should move the patient to a bed.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of that which causes dislocation in the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend the knee opposite to where it doubles up; the leg becomes shorter than the other, and the testicle becomes softened, and the head of the limb points to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the symptoms of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been reduced by itself or through your treatment according to its disposition, then it is not suitable for further cure; and thus there should be no further projection in its treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place it on that part where the dislocation is recent and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then cut when you return the joint and stretch it inwards and outwards, and turn it to the right and left, for the bones will quickly return and need no other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the affected side, or use a ligature, or a tight bandage placed over their thigh; another minister should extend your hand from above so that he places his fingers behind the patient's testicles; and nearby, tighten the ligature at the root of the issue, and have another minister hold the end of the ligature.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend it either from the leg or from within to open up the angle at the base of the spine, or from behind to the front of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And make the extension of all these at once, so long as the patient's illness is raised to their chest and the intestines hang down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is particularly suitable for all four (parts/ends).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to do everything that is appropriate for its cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then the ligaments should be tightened over the root of the fold in the area between the top of the fold and the place where the hernial orifice is; and finally, the ligament should be extended from the part of the angular (or edge) to the highest point of the furcula (hyoid bone).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another assistant should firmly hold the patient's arms, press against the thick part of the affected fold, and extend it outward with force for its reduction, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this particular type is of a lighter cure by which this member is returned to its original state compared to other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is not strictly adhered to this method of treatment for all cases, then the two feet of the patient must be tied together with a light, loose ligature on both the ankles and both the toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be such that it reaches four times the width of the other, with the affected leg extended more than the other by two times its width.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it should be two arms' lengths from the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the hernia, and suspend it from another young person, while another young person gently presses on the hernia with firm pushes, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction process, when there is a dislocation to the outside part, ensure that the patient holds on to a peg according to what we have recommended in its immobilized state; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh of the patient and on their foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then use two sticks as supports: one at the patient's feet and another at their head; and place a damp cloth wrapped around the middle of the stick on the affected leg to prevent the patient from damaging themselves while the stick is between their thighs, so that the extent of the damage to the parts away from the support is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you adhere to this reversal, it will be very beneficial; and otherwise, persist diligently on that which we have said regarding the application of heat in its initial state.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected limb, then with his other hand, he pulls it gently until it is restored to its normal position in the joint.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not ensure that the patient is extended on their side, but rather elevated above the ground; once you have verified that they are resting on a firm surface, just as we said about positioning them on two sides, and their face and limbs are slightly extended, as we also mentioned, there is no further need for adjustment.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, after the reduction is complete according to need—and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, since you extend two legs from the patient and when you see those angles and the patient extrudes their leg and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has been returned—and now you align two things and place a plaster and extract a bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then separate the ligament and plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those angles in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation has already been healed, and therefore release the patient.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, extract it according to your initial stretching, and release it in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then, after that, he should be made to walk slowly for some days until he is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outward, inward, or to the side, and not at all in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you order the patient to apply pressure on the affected area; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all ways of the shoulder is that you cease the patient's pressure straight away, so that he extends his limb if possible; attach the patient's back to their face, and hold their foot between your hands; then carefully attach the dislocated shoulder to your palms, and press those between your fingers over the shoulder of the patient until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-labouring position.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with bandages for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not indicated, then administer a strong extension to the ligaments of which mention has been made in the preceding treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the ankle bone is broken by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation is made either inside or outside the joints.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the bone appears swollen proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation is of gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and be engulfed before it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, it is essential to cease the patient's movement directly, and have a strong and capable assistant at the back of the dislocated part near its middle.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should use your right hand to lift the foot from the superior part and your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards your right hand with your left, and vice versa for two movements, then extend your left leg; press the foot of the patient against the bed frame with your right hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And on the third movement, push the foot against the bed frame while you are at the patient's side.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one movement or two according to this method, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that area.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is not possible for you to reduce the hernia in this way that we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and make a small hollow in the earth, and place the hernia there, and wrap cloth over it so that the hernia does not escape.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds the patient's limbs, and another minister extends the foot with its toes or the bandage lying on the top of the foot; and he/she extends each minister towards the extension of his/her part, and the padding between the thighs of the sufferer retains this, so that the body is not pulled away from its position after its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor will re-align the dislocation with his/her hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh away from the joint, so that the dislocation returns to its natural position easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction is successful, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with the ligament to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so that the ligament over them is not violent and damages those parts strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the inflammation subsides, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove it on the third day or after, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to move that space, it is not safe that the displacement will not cause the disorder to dissolve and corrupt, and this will receive no cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms during the cauterization, then apply what we mentioned in our previous narrative about treatment and immersion, in another place, for as long as it is necessary to heal it.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of joint displacement in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	You should know that one who is dislocated should be immobilized with a slight extension of their limb; and what is not difficult, it should be done quickly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some part of the foot, then you should immobilize the patient by placing their foot either on the ground or on a table, and hold it in that position as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should stand by the foot, place your hand over it to protect the joints, and press gently with the foot until the dislocation returns, ensuring that what was dislocated is now aligned and does not reappear in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a board under the patient's foot that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and tighten it with a decent and firm strain for three days; afterward, remove the board and allow them to rest from walking for several days, until the swelling subsides and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs and you endeavor in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, you often succeed in causing death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, it does not suffice that anyone presumes to know about the cure for it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, of long experience, mercy and compassion, gradually, without haste or presumptuousness; and that he uses cauterizing treatments at the beginning of medicines as much as necessary, leaving the judgment to the divine will, except for those whom you hope will be saved from death, or whose illness is alleviated, and in whom there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, he should strive as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than applying cauterizing treatments.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns to its proper place, administer treatment with a mild poultice and care for the sore as seems best for it with dry compresses.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If it is a dislocation and not a fracture, and it happens in separate joints, then you should open the skin over their joints, as we have mentioned for simple ailments of this kind in previous locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be mindful and careful regarding the use of medicines in the body's vital systems, as my instruction has already preceded this. For what is better for you than your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more beneficial to your true body in due time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, these words from Albucasim are perfectly concluded, for which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
