Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, having completed this book, the last of medical science, through its logical sequence it has reached its end, and considering its exposition, its explanations, and its declarations, I believe you have accomplished for yourselves this treatise, which is a part of the greatest operation, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, being the most complex and delicate of medical practices, it has been largely abandoned in our region and time, as its science is deemed dangerous and its methods outdated; only a few brief descriptions can be found in the books of the Ancients, which have led to errors and misconceptions regarding the understanding and application of its principles and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I have found it necessary to revive the order of this treatise through its second method of exposition and declaration and abridgment; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be added to the declarations, and for the preparation of the patient, which is essential.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why our skillful physician does not always achieve good results in this our time is because the art of medicine is very complex, and requires that he be well-versed in the science of anatomy to understand the growth of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; he must have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, know their names and how they are expressed; and of the pulsating and inactive veins, and the places where they emerge.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that reason, Hippocrates says that the name is appropriate, because in practice it is simple but more so in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not acquainted with what we have said about anatomy, will be apt to fall into errors that may cause men's deaths, as you have seen many such cases where persons, though trained in this science, nonetheless fall into ignorance and misapprehension through lack of experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you see a foolhardy doctor who has incurred a scrofulous abscess in the thigh of a woman, and incised some of her thigh's arteries so that great pus flowed until the woman died from it among her pains.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who prescribed a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state, and the stone was large, he came to him and extracted that stone with part of his bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for haste to extract it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he operated on a black crust that had a deep fracture in the thigh; because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture over the wound, with swabs and bandages with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then, according to their desires, release the tension, rest, and after some days, command that we loosen the bandage; and thus it is also for the foot, which if not treated properly will lead to harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you will have called upon him, and he will loosen the bandage, and achieved is peace, and thus also the alleviation of their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Yet if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, so that it cannot be restrained, and it does not cease to spread corruption throughout the member until the danger of the illness increases.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And he saw another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes an ulcer after some days, until the evil of it grows great under his lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the sharp pain is purely from melancholic humor; then it does not cover that it will come to him through all, but rather it should be in the member which suffers that it entirely overcomes.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on the body be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work which is perilous in the most important dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this in every place in this book where there are operations that contain error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and lay down that, so that the people do not take another path to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, set aside the terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and abandon your weapons of fear, so that your faith and your name are not abandoned: for greater is what remains to your glory, both now and in eternity, behind you and after your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	They already cut open some of their own organs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad ailments poorly, so that bad doctors do not become notorious.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, starting with the first part of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered on the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauterization, and about what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incision and perforation, and also with suckers, plaies, the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and relocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered on the head within the foot, and on the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	With hot cautery and sharp medicine, and the remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the heat from that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery heat and the documents of it is a long and prolix topic, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and already many savants have spoken of it, and there are disagreements among them, and to me, a small part of their discourse suffices, lest it become too prolonged.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cauterization will benefit the entire universal connection, whether of material or its matter, except for two connections, which are connections with their own matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the connection that is dry and devoid of matter, it is said that cauterization is beneficial, while others claim the opposite, asserting that cauterization is not appropriate for illness caused by dryness and quality, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be counterproductive to treat a dry and secluded condition with a hot and dry remedy.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite claim that cauterization is beneficial for all dry and secluded illnesses in the bodies of men, since when you compare the body of man with its humidity to the connection of fire, you find the body of man dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And they say through the discourse of that person, that they have already experienced this several times before in their discoveries.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate for someone who has already been trained and practiced in the art of cautery on various parts of the body to come upon this suddenly. He should be familiar with the diversity of the structure of human bodies, the disposition of their maladies, the causes of those maladies, the circumstances surrounding them, and the passage of time regarding those conditions.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other circumstances, there is no cause for fear, especially in the case of painful and moist maladies, as all doctors are in agreement regarding these, and they do not disagree on the treatment with cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it lie in cautery as a medicinal practice, for fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without inflicting pain on other members nearby, but rather requires a slight pressure.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members from which it is withdrawn, and it strongly affects a member afflicted with a difficult-to-heal malady, aiding its recovery.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm but rather serves. It has long been known through experience and the longevity of studying the art based on the truth of causes; therefore, I excuse you from the length of my speech. If it were not that this secret fire is not read at my leisure in this brief pause, I would conceal nothing from you regarding its nature, its operation in the body, and its expulsion of maladies, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my sons, that the best time to perform cauterization and make bandages is in the spring season.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by time's accident is overcome by the healing power of cauterization, and most especially when cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, severe and acute, which do not suffer delay, lest those that come later be harmed, as it is better to avoid harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so do not sit on your feet, my sons, for it is only the vulgar people and foolish doctors who believe that this illness, which is treated with cautery, does not fully heal, leaving a residual effect.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine due to the desire for its power, virtue, and greatness attributed to its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness returns at some point in time, depending on the nature of the illness and its location, and the power it holds within them, and what is prepared within their bodies from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; for the illness which receives cautery, if it is a subtle illness in a few excesses and humors, just as dental pain is treated with cautery, then it is possible that the same pain may not return to them, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is often said in popular speech that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a very right saying, not to those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that brings profit either by medicine or by any other cause with cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	But the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one applies the methods of healing in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery and profites from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	From which it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not entirely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it does not do so unless in certain bodies; cauterization with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you make a cautery with fire, it is not clearly known, because the quantity of gold you use depends on the urgency of the situation, and if you apply it over the flame, the gold melts into the fire, and sometimes certain sheets fall into the fire for the craftsman to recover.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterization with iron should be performed more gently and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to other chapters, and you have ordered those within the feet first, so that later I am asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization for head pain caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers dryness and coldness upon the affected part, which is one cause of sudden and multiple rheumatic flux, called rigor, from the head to the extremities of the limbs and ears, numerous times during sleep, as well as pain in teeth and the throat, and generally for any illness that arises from cold, also causing paralysis, stiffness, and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization involves first commanding the malady to be evacuated using a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head and place that scissors between your legs on a heated bench, and place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your palm's edge near the root of the nose between their heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the pain in the middle of the foot has been overcome, mark that place with a try, and then heat the olive-shaped cautery from which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the healthy area marked with a try, in a descending manner, so that the patient's hand is gradually constrained, and you remove that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then slowly lift your hand and examine the area; if you notice any bone uncovered, along with some amount of erysipelas (redness or swelling), raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that spot with the instrument (or another), as long as it is cold, until you can see the bone mentioned earlier.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the area soaked in border, leaving that one inside to destroy the wall of fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a four-ingredient remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens, the better the limb gets, so it is better and more rejuvenated.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that some should have their joints cauterized within the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the specific nature of the bone is dried up.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery one can reach the rear, strengthening the bone completely until it hardens, and this is the way to achieve perfect healing:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapours from the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not have the expertise to view these two types of cauterization instruments in all their variations, but according to certain sources, it is better for health when used appropriately; for when the head is exposed due to the solution of continuity within it, as we have witnessed in other members, and especially when the nature of the pain's head is fierce.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cauterization, which is primarily safer and better for me, should be used from this point onwards for these treatments to benefit health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head and this prolongs the illness, and various remedies such as swords, spikes, scalpels, ointments, guaiac, dogwood, goat's hair, and similar things are used, and especially if a cautery has already been applied that does not address the root cause of the malady, one must consider whether the nature of the head disease is robust; and if there is no great contusion or significant injury, then apply another cautery instead of this one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on the side of the patient's head where the bone is fractured using an internal cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and expose the amount we have found and cauterize it with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the area known as the 'vas'—and that is the location where the vacuum is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bones, for this malady causes great and diverse pain compared to all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should perform this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cauterization than the one performed on the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capital chapters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe pain in the head or a sharp pain within the skull occurs, it is treated with medicinal capings, and other cures as I have mentioned regarding various ailments; if this does not provide relief, then cauterization on the affected area is performed in two ways: either with an acute medicinal fire or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	You may use cauterizing medicines or burning therapies, take a hot compress, cut open the affected area, and amputate its ends from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the site of pain in the temple with a sharp lance, until it is felt to be in the right place, leaving the thread untouched.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then you should bind it tightly with a compress for a descent contraction, leaving it for three hours; afterwards, remove the compress and place the affected area in cold water or ice for two to three days, and then apply a warm compress until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you should treat it with a poultice until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you prefer, follow these burning medicines as described in the two treatises on burning medicines that I have written.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Apply the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite the cautery, whose shape is thus:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in the middle part of it.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply pressure to the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turn the iron at a gentle pace.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood stuck due to the specific nature of the wound is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the artery, raise your hand so that the artery is not compressed, preventing the flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a compress with salt water over the area and leave it for three days; also apply a lot of moist heat until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, burn the tip of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this recent wound.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat a wound as we have discussed in the previous section on cure and division of illnesses, but the treatment does not take effect, and the illness worsens, requiring a different approach than that of the initial cauterization with medicine or fire, then ignite the cuticular cautery until it becomes blanched. Place your hand over the area once more and press gently as you slice through the artery, aiming for the source of the pain.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is essential for you to prevent the jaw from moving excessively, as this impairs chewing. Ensure that the wound is not too deep and that the nerves or vessels are not damaged, and avoid any spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the prevention and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is damaged, as damage to it is a cause for concern, especially for those who do not understand what it does and are not diligent or patient; then delay the operation on it until the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And now we come to the remembrance of the regulation of the flow of accidental blood from the artery according to their (doctors') manner, in their place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not allow for the application of a cautery and the body of the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned above, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you find that the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter about the stretching of arteries with two edges is administered, this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of earache.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not subside, apply heat with cautery. This is known as 'puncta', and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the cautery close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire ear as if it were turning, or in any way that the pain is felt.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Move the cautery along the edge of the ear slowly, until the area is numbed by the application.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with pointed points is done all over the ear, and how it feels, then treat the areas within until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species that come from flux, as we have said in the divisions of ailments.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of tortuous vein with pulling and snipping and sucking, and do not confirm your cure, then know that you cauterize the ailment in three places: first, you burn the auricle, second, a small part of its temple, and third, the connection of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery over the opposite side of the affected area, for mollification comes only from the part that appears to be healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to apply the cautery to the base of the auricle, slightly above the corner of the forehead, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the skin is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it is specially made from a knife, the shape of which is placed on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and its cure does not respond to what has been said, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all the corners of their head; also cauterize the middle part of the head as we have said; and cauterize the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is most derider; and then it is carefully cured with what you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	About the cauterization of oblivion made by heat.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient hot drinks and pills in the beginning, the servant will then wash them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the whole head of the patient and place the poultice on their chest as described in the treatment tractate.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, as this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the steps I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if these remedies do not help him, then make three cauterizations to him in the last part of his head, descending from the highest part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, hold the pressure of the finger, and then carefully tend to the cautery as the procedure continues.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have additional assistance and the patient can tolerate it, perform the cautery on the middle part; but if you need greater assistance, cauterize that on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Cauterize carefully the area that needs healing; and make the cautery marks as per the shape as given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the procedure of dispelling parasites and softening throughout the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand that you must proceed in the softening of the head with jerks and according to what we have said; then carefully shave the patient's head, and cauterize that in the middle part of the head with a cautery, and cauterize on all corners of the head, and cauterize on the rear part of it, and make three cauterizations on the spinal bones of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of hardening of the body from too much heat and the illness tolerates it and the illness is severe, then cauterize with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and later apply a cautery until the burning pain of it is eliminated, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then carefully tend to it until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy is not cauterized, but only that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is important to purify the brain of the patient at the beginning when you have used fire and other treatments as described in our discussion when the illness is severe and resistant to medical treatment.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them, for several days, to improve their digestion.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery to that area with a hot iron in the middle of the head, as previously described, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over each of the shaved areas of their head, they should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient's condition is severe and they are tolerant, then apply cautery as described, with a view to having a paralyzing and relaxing effect on the body, over the spinal columns of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and excessive moisture, then cauterize it with the cauteries we have mentioned in case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then he should drink water that purifies the mind according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and make a slight cut on the scalp above the affected area, and then pause to let it heal in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel relaxed, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply the ointment; it is now more suitable for grazing before sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that above the fire with a temperature measured by degrees, which causes him to suffer when it is most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take that in the middle part of his head in a circle and release it until it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient every day for a week, or according to his diet, until he is cured; or, if you want, make small punctures with a pointed cautery, as best suited to him, but always keep your hand on it: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that ointment soaked in the border or in the grey of a goose.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the incision of water descending in the kidney.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that water descends in the kidney through the signs that I have mentioned in the previous section, then it begins and causes the patient to drink something that purifies the head of the kidney, and attend to all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And do that soaking in a bath with some herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that place with a hot iron; and cauterize two places with two irons if it is the beginning of water descent in two kidneys, or one side if it is the beginning of water in one kidney.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterization should be on that long in the width of the thighs.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to the knowledge that is derived from arteries, amputation of those and care to prevent blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterization tools, producing healing.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and frequent, and through veins and arteries manifest in the external part of the head, it is determined that this is due to excessive fluidity of the connective tissues, then cauterize with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, and make cauterizations in the middle part of the head and two cauterizations below each temple, and two cauterizations below each bone.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional need, then cauterize across the entire width of the eye's coat on the edge of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	**On the Cauterization of Nose Putrefaction**
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat a patient with the method we have described in the previous section and your treatment does not benefit them, then prepare and give to the patient the following herbs to drink for three nights; then shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply the cautery, using a claw-shaped cautery over both eyebrows, leaving the hair intact on one side.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the claw-shaped cautery is shaped like this.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid using a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is the shape of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply the cautery over both eyebrows with a small claw-shaped cautery across the entire area, and they should be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI.**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs change to scabs within and close up the wound.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs on the eyelid change to scabs within and close up the wound, cauterization is performed in two ways: either by making a cut or by using a medicinal burning substance.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterization with fire is performed, instruct the patient to shave their hairs in such a way that they are neither too long nor too short; and if you need to, tie the eyelids shut with a bandage so that the hairs do not grow back until they have healed.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born and engorged, place the patient's head on their left side, then apply pressure over the eyelid of their eye attempting to make a sign, a sign according to the shape of a dead leaf, and it should be the beginning of the sign near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a cold compress or a mucilaginous paste of plants over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then apply the heat from the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And apply the cautery over the marked figure, gradually and in small touches, until the surface of the skin, which is as if with a leaf of myrtle, is completely charred, apparently.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the healing of the eye is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hairs raised at the point of the eye's puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then apply a poultice to the affected area until the pain is alleviated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then make another cautery on that place exactly as you did originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hair is on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place, sealed, and the hair does not smell bad.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is what you command the patient to do with the hair until they are prolonged and sealed, and then make a cloth in the shape of a fir leaf from the bandage.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap known and a sharp object, or what is suitable for this purpose, and mix those causes well, making it into a paste so that it is not frozen; and spread it over the cloth made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both wounds; and wrap the wound edge soaked in albumen of egg, and the patient's head should be at a lower level.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then stop talking about the medicine and apply a small amount, not too much, until the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for burning is how it acts within them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as you continue to observe this that the treatment is burning, stop the medicine and apply it again with caution; then, when the burning stops, wash the wound with water. And consider if the eyelid is lifted as it should be washed daily with either heat or incision, for that is what is appropriate now; and if it doesn't return to the application of this medicine at the place where the treatment wasn't effective, you risk compromising your operation and causing the wound to close up.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the affected area until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and apply a healing ointment or something else until it is cured.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls away, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days due to any cause from the hairs in the eye, repeat your medicine on that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and indeed, just as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way of extracting the myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and therefore your treatment must be adapted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let the path of treatment not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not help, then know that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to sit with their head in a low position, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is neither harmed nor agitated by their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place some cloth soaked in alum or a paste of flower petals on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then shape the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be curved, similar to the shape of a cane or a serpent's tongue, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to get out this way, try it with caution.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet he who is experienced is better at the medical work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the infection from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over it a cautery that has been well-lit, and with your hand slightly lift the cautery from the part of the nose, so that your hand or the illness is not disturbed, and press the cautery on the gray parts of the nose and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of the burning with the cautery it penetrates into the bone, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; then leave that thus for three days, and apply your hand over that area with a dry compress until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it is not healed, then apply the sharp, corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and it heals as it should in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	There is another way to perform the fistula cautery that some masters speak of: enter the location of the fistula and close it; then apply your hand over the fissure gently, whose shape must be thus: pour a quantity of melted lead there; with your other hand, hold it firmly without harming the patient, so that the lead does not reach the wound of the illness. Cover the wound of the illness with cloth or water, as lead will adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it by a wonderful process.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the nose inside according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of the Fistula**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequently, accidents cause fissures on the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the methods we have discussed and your treatment does not take effect, make a small cut with a knife following this form...
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and the cavity of it according to the thickness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully on those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that moist compress until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of the uvula, or in the palate or around the teeth, there is an abscess that forms, and it breaks open, and becomes chronic, and a fistula is formed, and if you treat it but do not fully cure it, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula. Place that burning cautery into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand, guide the burning point to reach the depth (of the fistula), doing this once or twice; and thereafter treat it with moist compresses as we have said regarding treatment, until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the wound is incised and cleansed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and accommodate the corrupted bone as it will be discussed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX:**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, and these conditions are not remedied with medicines alone, then place the patient's head on the knee, and shape the cautery so that when you place the flame over the tooth, it enters deeply enough for the patient to feel the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, having been effectively removed.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which he should spit it out, for the loosened tooth will be firmly set, the softened gums will tighten, and the corrupt moisture will be dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is swelling or pus in the tooth, and treatment with medicine does not bring relief, then a cautery should be performed in two ways: either with a cow's tail or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow's tail involves taking a strand of cow's hair and twisting it into a coil, then burning that in the fire, and afterwards, taking the hot end and wrapping it around the affected tooth, pressing down firmly until the pain is numbed by the cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or twine in the wound on top of the tooth, and place that over the painful spot, and also place the heated iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization is to address the inflammation or infection, and it should not be too severe or intense so as not to affect the opening of the hernia.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide and holds the cautery for about an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have made extreme as it is within your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of extrophules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophules are caused by fluid and humors that do not obey digestion due to medicines, and you wish to remedy them slightly, then apply the cautery precisely according to its shape, having two pointed ends so that the fire of the cautery may reach both sides, and place the glowing end on the affected area once, and another if it needs more attention, until it reaches the point of the extrophule.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the extrophule is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, placing a bandage over it gently until it heals completely from the burn.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that medicinal ointment and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or pointed cautery for such use is conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of wounds and constriction of vessels.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the surface of the lung, especially when it is chilled by external contact, then know that this illness must be evacuated at the beginning with medicinal laxatives, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to harm the gullet with the cautery or inflame the patient's ribs, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that or another cautery as needed on the joint of the neck in the last spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of him is done with a sharp claw, following the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully tend to that as it is mentioned above until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	**Chapter 23**
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	**On the Cauterization of Lung Sickness and Coughing**
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung sickness are caused by moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old illness, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with cautery on the furcula (the bony structure in the base of the throat) at the spots that are vulnerable to infection; another cautery in the middle of the foot between the big toe and the next toe; and both cauteries should be done with a sharp claw, following the method mentioned above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the pointed cautery called a 'punta', the form of which precedes in the puncturing of the pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make punctures within these; and then carefully apply to it the remedies that are mentioned before so that it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery having three bends, for cauterization is made to that: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the titillium (the head of the helper).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return in its proper place, you must reduce its dislocation until it returns, and with a slight movement, it should be adjusted as it usually does; at first, reduce the dislocation, then return the malady to its original position on the patient's back or side, and lift the leg that was affected, placing your hand over the affected area above the knee of the injured limb.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two points; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the wound where one penetrates the other; and the figure of cauterization will appear when using three cautery points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so these are subtle according to the quantity of attempts; and this is their form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this rule, and these are the eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the entire cautery over the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the member for any time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then this should be done, cauterizing over the muscle with a hot cautery or with pointed cold cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the humidity is broken, and the malady is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When stomach pain arises with moisture within, causing the abdomen to expand, and if treatment methods are not changed, the patient will feel the disease pressing on their back, extending their limbs and organs, and should cauterize these three areas: first, leave a mark on the foot with a finger-sized cautery, and use two cauteries on either side of the back's costates, forming a triangular cautery shape; stretch those that are not properly adjusted to prevent ulceration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, following this shape; and this should be a circular cautery, as shown here.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it, as long as this cautery does not frighten him: you know how much to puncture with the cautery according to your will, and then cauterize these points; and take care of that treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter 27.**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein occurs due to coldness or moisture or excessive windiness, and the disorder has deviated from its normal course by causing excessive discharge, treat the illness as we have said and do not compress it, but rather allow the disorder to be raised over its root; then try three cauterizations according to this form, applying this amount of heat over the vein below the hip bone, which will induce the patient's recumbent position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not be afraid of the pointed cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of the substance adhering to the amount of the specific nature of the cord is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the illness stands on the feet of the patient; or if it is not standing, then let him be sitting, who has already extended his things and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cuttlefish cautery, when it is in your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and focus the sight of all present so that the whole body is warmed and penetrates into the intestines, for here the chain is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the abscess ends in the leg and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the leg or in the sheath (tunica) surrounding it, if it is in the flesh, the illness takes on a serious character and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the sheath (tunica) surrounding the leg, then the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in their attempts to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is in the correct position; then identify the location of the abscess; and apply the pointed cautery, which resembles a rag, whose shape was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with these cauterization tools until all the wound is healed, so that it reaches the bone, and the infection disappears.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other abscesses until it is cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery except for that which is studied in the art of medicine and has been proven effective; indeed, some may find it daring to perform such an operation, but it is better to adhere to those methods that have been well-established, and they are more safe.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter XXIX.**
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cautery techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin cut end of an artery from the leg and making a point on it with a knife. It should be of suitable thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then submerge that in oil and heat it over fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery there; place two small cauteries below, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard is, and two cauteries inclining between the fifth rib and the scapula, slightly inclined towards the rear parts; another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries in the rear parts; and a cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the inflamed part in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauterizes like a ray and burn that part, placing it in the space between the ribs, to overcome that pain and restore health, as we have said regarding the hernia of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation with cautery, there is no cause for fear, as it often happens in the infected place, where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	**Chapter XXX.**
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	**On the Cauterization of the Spleen.**
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the spleen using what we have said about treatment in division, and you do not apply your cure, cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauterizes on the leg, the shape of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the same as we have described for the cautery of the flesh equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not let your hand be burned by the cautery, and the patient should lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two points, which causes us to speak in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the cord which is at the end of the plate so that it holds the patient's left side without pain.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the extent of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert both points, ignite slowly, in that place where they penetrate the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, three times the cautery has been applied.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should care for the cautery so that it does not fall off for several days, as it is more comfortable than other treatments preceding in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydropic (watery) conditions.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization does not take place in hydropic conditions but specifically in inflammation.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydropic conditions using the methods mentioned in our division and your treatment does not help, then you should apply four cauteries in the shape of a circle around the belly, one cautery on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the chest, two cauteries between the spine of the back, and one cautery directly on the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the case.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause pain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment with the cautery, as it covers what needs to be added so that two intentions are achieved, and it will be strengthened with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to burn the belly should be according to its form from before, and it is that which is called 'clavilh', whereas that which is cauterized on the back is 'olivar' according to its form preceding it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of Feet and Other Parts:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are submerged in water and filled with salt water, be sure to cauterize the feet over the arch of the foot between the big toe and the little toe, holding the cautery at a distance, and do not twist it; then lift your hand, but do not lower it completely, for the salt water is exuding.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Make the cautery as follows: Then place two cauteries on both sides, and with the tip of the cautery make a cautery on each side.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cautery according to the length of the limb: leave one and place the other at the middle of the limb; and over each side two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then address those causes we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter .XXXIII.**
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts.**
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal parts are infected and moist, one must eliminate the evil humors, which are the digestive and retentive virtues located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with curative methods that do not cause wounds. Sometimes, severe illness requires the use of cautery to expose these virtues, then cauterize them with a large cautery over their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, or with circular and four small cauteries around the subtle nerves, or with a fine-pointed cautery; and also cauterize over the gallstone with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity persists and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure that does not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are of a natural origin, deriving from old hemorrhoids, or a thick humor or corrupt humidity, and are not cured by the means already mentioned, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus left in the small of the back, forming a small triangle, and apply another cautery to the navel on both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you observe that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; also apply one cautery to the abdomen, and another cautery to the patient's armpit with a clavicle cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then dress them until they heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cauterization of hernias, they remove the hernia.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the hernia, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that flame into the hernia you have removed, and secure your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, you cauterize each one of them as we have said, and then care for those affected by applying ointment to them until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is more beneficial for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the tissues of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the procedure we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one observes a fistula formed naturally in the body that is old and corrupted by impurities of moisture, it is most worthy to attempt its closure with subtle attempts, and then gradually remove the amount of the depth of the fistula according to the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Gradually heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cautery onto this fistula according to the amount in which it intersects the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery again until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, then pay attention to all those places; and do not attempt this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you believe it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the matter that caused it has been removed, and it heals for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not of its own kind, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting the tissue where it is, and it will come from those causes of which there will be recollection in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, it is necessary to cauterize those over the ulcers with a cautery instrument on each ulcer, specifically a clavihed that aids in drawing out the memories (of the illness).
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should strongly cauterize it according to the second method, leaving a small space, so that three cauterizations will follow, and thus there will be fewer later complications.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease does not retain urine, apply a cautery to the opening where it leaves the bladder, beginning at the root of the penis, and cauterize with a cautery on both its right and left sides.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of pain symptoms; apply a cautery with one at the lower part of the back, or two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be applied as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX. (This indicates the beginning of a new section or chapter, but without additional context, it's impossible to provide a meaningful translation.)
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the fever and humidity rise, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstruation becomes corrupt, making conception delayed, and causing pain with their discharge, then you should cauterize the area around the navel with three cauteries, as we have said about the bladder cautery; or a cautery above the anus, or two cauteries, and they should be cross-shaped.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the displaced ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucous membranes are infiltrated into the joint space of the ankle, and they cause swelling in that area, and a sign of this is when the affected side appears longer than the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the site of the dislocation is filled with blood.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus with a circular cautery, for you will have already tried to loosen the circle around the opening, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned previously takes the form of the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then apply three large olive-shaped cauteries instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the veins; and take care that it remains healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII (42)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower part of the body due to friction and moisture, the disease is treated with the water we have mentioned and do not mix, and this is ancient, then you should remove the disease from thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery on that area follows two ways: either with medicinal burnings or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area across the opening of the patient's thigh with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the said area, and if the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some times, cautery may be applied to the middle part of the ankle for it are four cauterization points.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form proceeds in the cauterization of the ankle dislocation, one that is circular and burns away the tenderness of all the ligaments.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in chronic pain when it is confined to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize it as follows: two cauterizations on the thigh over the area where the pain originates; and one cauterization on the shin bone, four days apart on the inner side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is with a blade, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the quantity of tenderness in the ligament.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the disease spreads that the pain is located in the lower part of the leg, then apply cautery here where you see it necessary with three or four or more points if required for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the disease causes pain to radiate in the vein of the thigh, then apply a cutaneous cautery there.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery so as not to finish with the cautery in such a way that you injure nerves or cause great pain, and through this it is upon the patient to do harm or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated within that the swelling achieved the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and this brings death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And certain wise men spoke of the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circular iron hook, whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm stem or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, make another one-third of its size; and the space between them should be the width of a night's rest; and these circles should be in two parts; and the length of those lines should be a nut or two nuts, and make on the edge of iron decently adorned with circles; this is the shape of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light it in the fire until it wraps around and sparks, and then place it over the part of the water, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize that part with three pointed cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then, for three days, apply a poultice to that part, keep the wound open for several days, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my sons, we have used this type of cautery little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few of us have found those that work best over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Apply the best cauteries to him who suffers, and find the appropriate place for them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Use cautery as a medicine when you make two circles with a perforated armor, in which the lock of the door is inserted; let the length of the wall at the narrowest point be equal to two nuts or whatever suits them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the quantity of its thickness, they should be opened from above and below, and they should hold each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then apply pressure to the part where the patient feels pain on their side, and take your hand away from the affected area; then take some cold water and pour it between two circles, making its quality hot little by little, for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and tightness — for that tormenting burning is as if fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and dry off all the cold water with hot water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then do this for three days, applying pressure to the affected area until the burning feels less intense, and repeat this for several days, as it will help heal; this is best in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a suitable poultice until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is spread throughout the thigh or leg, put them in a position that holds water according to the method used in the hot spring.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a mixture of alkali and caustic substances from both sources, grind them, and place them in a new mold where the opening left by the departure is pierced with a small tool according to the amount that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then put the bottom of the mold in another vein or source, and place over it the hot alkali and caustic water with your hand, and after pressing them together, leave the mold so that the hot water from the medicine descends through the opening left in the cold water-filled mold.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and add another living cause and a renewing alkaline, because it will serve as a powerful and sharp remedy, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterization of the other members, for operation is from fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are certain medicines that include cauterization with wide bandages, both quickly and skillfully, and cause a pleasant sensation and the cure of evil in such a way that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	He here recounts a story of an ancient man who performed an operation and cure for the pain of water (perhaps referring to hydrocele or a similar condition) and sciatica, and magnifies it as a remarkable feat. He states that this method is indeed effective and there is no need for other treatments, and because of its strength, one should immerse the affected part in water and ice to achieve the same result.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that near a certain vein (or perhaps a specific location), if it is not obstructed by a vein, a recent fig (or possibly a different object) should be used; many times it is squeezed with a little gray substance and placed in the water where the pain is, or on the affected part, or on the leg, and it is bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the condition requires relaxation of the adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in water and as the body of the patient becomes heated, insert hot compresses into the affected area, as this relieves pain and promotes healing.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines unless it is for the evacuation of the bowels.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the narrow vein of the foot is cauterized, it heals well; and the cautery should be applied to him in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat hair and make an ember with fire inside, and place it on the wool and let it spread within.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this type of cautery is called a cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is felt in the back for various reasons, such as from a fall or blow or from excessive discharge, and for similar causes, due to the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not apply to any other species but this one, which is caused by the discharge of foreign, irritating material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, for the evacuation of the malady, prepare pills that resemble them and make them over the part where the pain is felt three lines deep according to its extent, applying cautery in each line as much or little as the patient's endurance allows, depending on the strength of the malady and the virtue of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with nail-shaped cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of yellow fever.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	These manifestations should be closely observed in small children; the onset of this illness in children is marked by stiffness in their little joints, and elevation and movement aggravate the condition.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last spinal bone of the back and the joints connected to it that begin to protrude over the other spinal bones.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to prevent it, you cauterize it with a circular cautery in the following shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery across all parts of the spine evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be proper among themselves.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then properly care for the area until it heals as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered to a swelling that is caused by a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	**On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain**
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by cold humors is treated with a heating method and not just alleviating the pain, then cautery is used.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is because you cauterize the appropriate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot with various cautery tools.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the olive cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain intensifies within the joints or other parts of the body, and this persists, then cauterize it with three or four cautery instruments using this olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use these cautery instruments, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, merely touch the specific part of the chain.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain persists within the joint and the bone, then administer the cautery as we have mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the muscles only and is called rheum, then make points along the course of the tendons thus as they revolve, points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these, make points along the course of the tendons on each bone and on the tendon of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can also spread to joints or muscles, then apply a cautery to the affected parts throughout the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient from good care and the reception of medicines, for if good care is taken and the fever is removed by this cautery, then the patient will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (45)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the angles and opens hernias against the intestines, at this point, it is necessary to begin by asking the patient to stop eating on that day and to use gentle remedies so that the hernia does not protrude from their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue to support the patient between your hands on their back, and instruct them to keep their breath inside so that any hernia or opening of intestines does not occur.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the intestine to its place, and carefully try to close the rupture on the bone of the thigh, marking the end of the fracture's extent similar to a circle at the upper openings of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And now, apply the cautery in the shape as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Into which a hot and wet compress should be applied.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then apply the cautery again over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and try to get the tooth of the nail into the middle of the toe; and repeat this another time if it does not come out at first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the state of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to cause that hernia any harm that might lead to death or other grave illness on top of the existing condition.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not interfere with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the cautery site for three days, applying hot compresses until the burning sensation disappears.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other burns until they heal.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be laid on their back for 10 days until the wound is healed and the pain subsides.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care that the patient's diet be adjusted according to the duration of their healing process, restraining them from eating anything that might disturb their stomach, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to effort during recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is necessary to lift after about ten days, then administer a suitable treatment and keep him on this for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should reduce his work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, which begins at the start, and if they do not heal, cauterize the rupture with a red hot cautery according to its size, and it should be done so that what is expelled from the body comes out as well; and then care for this as we have said, and do not make it too tight.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked by attempt.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that they hold by the width on the cloth above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain ends in various members due to cold or impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment with medicines, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to each member according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain it suffers.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are punctures in members close to them, so you must succeed with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes require cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is characterized by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is acute or chronic, and treat it according to what has been said in the previous division, without causing further damage, especially if the disease has spread throughout the body and threatens its entire structure. You should cauterize it on the head, starting at the center of the scalp and then moving downwards, and also on both sides, forming two horns; and behind, upon the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, with your hand, apply the cautery slightly inside where it touches the bone, allowing any remaining fluids to drain, thus alleviating the release of harsh vapors; and cauterize on the surface as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then cover it with cautery those cauteries which we have mentioned in the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each eye-socket, and two cauteries on both spines of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great cautery on the spines near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx itself, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and cauterize the tendons of their feet; cauterize over all the joints of the upper and lower limbs, and over every talon of their feet, and on the soles.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are on the sole, do not irritate those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the sigmoid colon.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its benefit and effectiveness; and you should know that illness does not reside in the cautery itself, but rather in its application, since the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take note that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the types of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stuck or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal, then you cauterize the stuck member with cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the hot cautery enter slightly into the depth of the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that remedy until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases, a cautery is used to alleviate the pain that radiates to the most and feet, the spine of the back, and the tension of the nerves which affect that limb, and the pain is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	One must not attempt this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .XLVIII (or .xlix)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of bleeding wounds.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the wound is old and does not heal with any of the common medications, then apply a cautery to it, using a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord until the whiteness and color of it are reduced and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a remedy from flour of oats and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of arnica, or pigeon's blood or deer's blood, each one separately and all together, and apply it as a compress to the affected area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or lacks context for a precise translation. The term "Capitol .l." could refer to various things depending on the subject matter or surrounding text. Without additional context, it's challenging to offer an accurate translation. If this is from a medical treatise, it might refer to a specific treatment or a part of the body, but more information would be needed to confirm.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	**Cauterization of Cracks:**
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its edge as it rotates.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the learned say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, for I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better to cauterize it along its edge with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a few cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is slow to heal, it may be due to excess fluid, or the state of the illness, for it is old and weak, lacking strength, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the healing of the abscess; then cauterize along its edge with a few small punctate cauterizations; and apply pressure to it, as it will aid in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, first heat the cautery whose shape is thus: and place it in the middle of the prepared area until the thread penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to that place which is most painful, in order to relieve the pressure on the arm; and then take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	**Chapter II.**
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	**On the cauterization of corrosion.**
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading decay in the member which eats away the tissue as if it were dry wood being consumed by fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place which is to be treated with fire, heat cautery clamps, small and large as appropriate for the location of the corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply cautery from all sides until you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then apply a poultice for three days, placing it over the cauterized areas, every three hours, using a mixture of oils until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with a warm, blood-letting poultice.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	It may be that after three days, the flesh will have healed without corruption, which is good; but if not, the cautery should be repeated over what remains corrupted in the affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And for corrosion, it is treated with certain sharp medicines, as those which are applied instead of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, it is better to use a hot cautery for treating young wounds.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already spoken of the cure for it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will need from it to be prepared.
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter XXXIII**
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Claws and Similar Conditions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	You often see protrusions in the parts around the foot afflicted with malady, which is called a claw, and it causes great pain, entering the foot; these are treated according to two methods: there is cauterization with fire and cauterization with water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization with fire is done by igniting the cautery instrument shaped like a bird's claw, made of iron according to the quantity of the claw in all its parts, and it should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that hot instrument on the toe, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the toe until it reaches the depth of the toe.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply that paste made from wild mallows trifolded with salt to it, and leave the paste on it for one night, so that it will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area with generative flesh-based ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal and various accidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must administer to those cauteries with water, and take a small pipe of earth or iron or a needle, and place that over the toe; then pour a few drops of water into the pipe, hold your hand, and rotate it with compression on the toe, pushing the edge of the pipe along the root of the toe, and watch the water flow out from the root of the toe. Wait for the patient to feel the bite of the cold water for an hour, then remove it, because the toe will be freed from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they do to those who have it, return the other within them so that all of its parts in their body come together.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then take care of those pus that the roots of the clots have been eradicated with these ointments that the flesh engenders.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any tremor caused by friction on the nerves or by fever from a harmful cause, or for any other similar reason, it is necessary to cauterize that with four cautery points or two over each spinal joint, and also cauterize the foot of the patient and the stomach with olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient will cease and hasten the healing of the harmful illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidental burns on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When burns on the body cause blisters and cracks filled with corrupt thick matter, at the beginning, cover it with an appearance that is cauterized over all parts of the fistula with a delicate cautery or a mirt's twig, whose tip is extended towards the fire; or shave it with a long razor; or cauterize it with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cauterization is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; they are not rigid, and the excess matter is removed from them, thereby healing those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it may be necessary to cover that this is done with an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flux of blood from an accidental wound by incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Wounds that show a flux of blood from an artery that has been incised must be treated immediately, or after the incision of blisters or cauterization on a limb, and it appears similar, and it is difficult to control that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you must use both your hands on the wound's edge, pressing firmly until the bleeding stops, and ensure that the bandage is placed correctly so that it does not move.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply a few small and large olive cauterizes on the fire, and blow into them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then carefully take from them a small or large amount, according to the location and the illness in which the artery is broken, and apply the cautery swiftly so that it is incised and the flow of blood restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you withdraw the cautery and remove it, take another cautery carefully from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the flow of blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to hurt the nerve here, which might bring about other evils for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four means: either with cautery as mentioned above, or by drawing it out when it is not drawn out, for when its extremities are cut off, the flow of blood is restricted and the clot is tightened; or tied up with thread or ligature by strong constriction; or medicated so that its virtue restricts the flow of blood; or compressed with a cushion at the cost of great pain.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a reasonable restriction of movement and applies compression with bandages or due to burning causes and similar ones, does not relieve but aggravates.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open the mentioned passage of the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within it that prevents the plague from spreading; and on the swelling, do not apply remedies but rather pour cold water over it until the inflammation cools down and subsides; and consider what cautery or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions, punctures, blisters, phlebotomy, wounds, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all illnesses in which fire cauterization is appropriate and medicinal burning useful, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for it, according to the forms of the cautery; I have arranged the chapters on the ascending order from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter in such a manner that it may relieve those who seek it, as far as it is necessary.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, know, children, that this chapter is about fear, as it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And since it is necessary to be in great caution, for the operation which is in this chapter often requires the evacuation of blood, which is dangerous to life; you must apply the vein or make an incision over the abscess, or perceive the discharge, or purify the wound, or extract the arrow, or begin the healing process, and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall upon you, for sometimes you must be careful with the ways of men, as with the sudden ways of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is of their nature that as soon as you turn away from their illness, death must be slighted; and this because of the vehemence with which it finds its illness, and because of the longevity of his illness, and the fearsome illness for which death means.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is those who give to you joy and words of hope, expecting health from them; and their illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you of this nature; let your caution be greater than belief and your greed; do not presume any cause regarding it except through certain knowledge that verifies for you what must happen to them, and to which a commendable succession has occurred.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your illnesses the prognosis and indication of that which is to be made whole, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, let God inspire your understanding and do not seek direction and protection elsewhere, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in anything concerning which you inquire and of which you stand in need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this illness often causes complications during childbirth, and when the child is born, the mother's life is in danger.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs unexpectedly due to an unknown cause.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This illness is rarely seen in adults; indeed, I have only witnessed it leading to death, and for this reason, I have observed its effects on the bodies of those who have passed away.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that the head of a child, whose skull was filled with water, was always thus magnified to such an extent that it could not be compressed by any means due to the size of its head, and indeed, the humidity increased to the point of causing death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the bone and the skull, or it accumulates beneath the bones on the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation, if the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the apostema is small, you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a fissure in width, and the length of the fissure should be two fingers deep so that the humidity can flow, and this is the shape of the spatulum.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is greatly increased and the apostema is larger, then here are two fissures according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity leaves the bone, it signals that you must fully open the commissures of the head and the water is squeezed out when you compress that part with your hand inside, and this should not be withheld.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must make an opening in the middle part of the head as three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then remove the incision and drain all the moisture; tighten the openings with bandages and sheets; drill holes from above into the wound and apply vinegar and oil within five days, loosen the stitches and treat the infection with poultices and ointments, tighten the bandage equally; and feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of making an incision, which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the swelling of the water, and do this as best as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and seek to drain blood and prevent the patient from suffering due to the flow of blood during the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of arteries close to the auricles, called hilaries.
Capitol segon.	**Second Chapter**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an event or injury to the ears or feet, and it is ancient and does not respond to medical treatment, then the final cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you wish to incision those that the patient's malady has made its head, then rub the place with rough cloth to expose the arteries, and tighten the collar of the malady with some cloth; then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the places that are close to the auricles become dull, and they are concealed in certain people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a seal over the artery with a bandage, and incision each one with the sharp edge of the scalpel as the incision reaches within the bone, and this is according to the size of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula between the artery and squeeze it to press against the opening of its compartments.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be such that when a vein is incised, the blood flow is immediately halted by the pressure, which otherwise would gush out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the belt, then measure from the edge a distance of three digits and make an incision here, then carefully open it and enter within the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that gushes out should be about a cupful, and do not let it flow more or less, and all this depends on the extent of the patient's weakness and the elasticity of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and therefore if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, incise it here so that it does not lead to gangrene.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a strong poultice with feathers and linen cloth from the drapes, and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	It appears that you have provided a heading or a section title, but no text for translation. If you have the actual content of "Capitol .iii." to translate, please provide it, and I will be happy to assist.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Extracting the arteries located in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an ancient or sudden migraine occurs due to excessive humidity and the state of the temples' lacertae (possibly referring to the skin or membranes), resembling those of a sore throat, and standard medical treatments are ineffective, we often resort to extracting arteries in the temples through cauterization, as previously mentioned.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of these is to address the condition that causes them in the temples; and understand the artery involved in the temple as you have seen it pulsating, which is hidden from most people due to its velocity and force.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the patient's condition is obscure, tighten the opening of the wound with a cloth; then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate it with boiled water until the inflammation appears to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sputum that has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the cord with ease to reach the inflammation; and tie it at its origin and extract it from the upper parts until you extract that from the cord and discover that of the tunics which are left, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you should wrap it at the end of the finger and cut it into a segment according to the amount by which its extremities are elongated and contracted, and if they are not cut, blood will not flow from them.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the bowels of wine within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the swelling is great, you should bind it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords, and do not allow putrefaction to occur in front of the healing of the wound and apply flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then incise the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron within the bone or cut a knife across its extremities, and apply that kind of work in that place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a cold complication; for cauterization is of those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully extract the tendons that you have loosened from their original position, and place them properly in their place, adequately dusted, and treat with dry medicines to make the flesh and bones heal completely.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time the flow of blood from the tendon occurs, then you must constrict that blood flow, either with a cautery or by filling the socket, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of these causes is not present for you, then place your hand over the area until the pain is frozen, and apply the location with water of intense coldness until the sensitivity subsides, and tighten according as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more lightly extracted from the tendon, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have felt both locations by trying, and stop them, ignite some fire, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of the patient is elongated, as it is not solidified entirely by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both knees serves as an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better to have greater sharpness than two knees, because if they are very sharp, they do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is no great size involved, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than any other and is performed more lightly.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two knees is the amount of thickness of that.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic eye sores.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the eye sores are acidic, and this affects those veins located on the surface of the head, deforing it, and no medical cause for treatment is identified, the patient's face may appear discolored and their front movements are so hindered as if they were being moved by ants, and the eyes of the affected individual are exhausted, humid to the point that their eyelids are uncomfortable, and their eyelashes chafed due to the intensity of the tears. The ancient remedies for treating such conditions in this operation are sparse.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And so you command the patient to pull their eyebrows, which are located on their forehead, and then make three cuts in the forehead, evenly spaced apart according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two days: one fissure should be equidistant from the length of the nose at the middle point of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And observe the beginning of the arteries which are in two openings, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three days, adjust accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula with its two sharp ends, which is the form of the incision for it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	That concerns the part of the temples within the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the cord between two incisions at the muscle that is above the bone, and then do this from the median incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this space and insert another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp edge of this instrument against the flesh attached to the tendon, and the blunt side against the bone, and use it to reach the median fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The incision should be continued to where the tendon becomes visible, and then make this in the median fissure within the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the flow of blood stops, squeeze the areas of the frozen parts of the veins.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply some cold water and oil to each crack, and press over those powdery substances that are wet in wine and oil, and be sure not to allow any infection.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the bandage and apply a great deal of warm water or tea, then treat it with basilicum water or rose oil and other remedies to ensure that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. The term "Capitol" could refer to several things depending on the context, such as a geographical location, a building, or even a name. Without additional information, I cannot offer a meaningful translation.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Regarding the treatment of tears due to cataracts and the descent of fluids from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a sudden and continuous purging occurs, and the patient's feet are exhausted from walking, and their attention is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated, and their eyes' lashes are fallen out, and sharp pain is felt in the head along with subsequent vomiting, then you know that these accidents occur when materials and purge come not from within but from the veins of the parts proceeding outward.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to clear their front, and then cut a fissure in the middle of the forehead, slightly to one side (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and make the cut within the bone; and with your hand, remove the clotted blood from the temples, which is best after mastication). As long as the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the pus with a sponge or clean cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the fissure with warm, thin fabric or a clean cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply to them dry poultices soaked in wine and oil, lest they contract a dangerous infection.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you cut it and see that the infection has already decreased, then you know to rub the bone that begins in the deepest flesh, and apply a dry dressing made from mixing two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, as if you were making a paste, and administer this remedy to these wounds of carnal origin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what cats have in their ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that cats have in their ears is one of four types: it may be a hard mineral or something similar, such as iron or copper, or it could be from plants like chickpeas or fava beans, or fluid-related, such as water mixed with wine and similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a catarrh occurs in the ear or any other similar cause that does not adjust or adhere to the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the catarrh persists, it will distill into some cause of violet oil or butter, then administer the extraction of it, and make it flow out in a condition, and oppose the nose to prevent the sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear canal and pull the ear away from its attachment, as these movements often dislodge the causes behind these issues.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not dislodged, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called a delicate epichiric forceps, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is dislodged with the forceps, then it is good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very thin instrument with slight curvature.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of linen and insert the end of the cannula into the channel of the ear, closing around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that only the cannula opens.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the tongue with great force, as it is often seen with what we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this method is forgotten, take a piece of hot embers or a torch with which the outsides of the limbs are gently heated, and place that on the end of the ray, then neatly wrap it around.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if all the causes we have described are not forgotten, then quickly tie off that which causes abscess or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting is that you begin by cauterizing the infection from the saphenous vein and extract the pus according to the nature of its virtue, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the edge away from the parts above, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the greasiness of the pus has been most pressed against it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure extends to the pear (testicle), and when the pear is swollen, you can stop it with an appropriate instrument; then quickly apply pressure to the fissure at that time to heal it.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the grasses that have grown and are inflamed, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not follow your own advice, then take some thin sponge according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that grass which has fallen into the auricle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by heat, place it on heavy weights, or try to extract it with scissors or subtle movements, or through incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that enters the ear, it is important to understand that the disease often starts with sneezing, and the inner ear should be filled with some soft substance up to a certain extent. Then, place your hot hand on the affected ear and if the water is expelled through this method, it is successful. Otherwise, take a few peals of eggs or lemon and slightly warm them in the fire, and then place one of these between the patient's fingers and press hard against the ear canal.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water has been drawn off so that you take some paper or cloth, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end over the fire until the entire length is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then place another cloth and repeat this process until all the water is drawn out, and strip off that one with the cannula as they say the water drawer.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body from an ear, if it is small and resembles one, it should be treated as we have said in division; but if it is of great size which causes appearance at the sense of disease, then administer the extraction of it by gesture and incision, and the cause of it is pus more lightly than all other causes that catch in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with the methods we have said in division and in the treatment of distills, and do not agree with your care, then take care to watch the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with careful or subtle gestures, but if no cause appears, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which is the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the extremely subtle end into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the malady; then suck it with a strong suction, and do this in turns, until all worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not follow this method, then seal and close the tube in the circle of the ear with wax as we have said; administer distills which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distills.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your flow of oil with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, is with this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make a small, narrow incision in silver or iron, leaving it open, and place a plate over it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is with what is in the cavity of the container here, it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end decently close, and then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing aid, or some herbal juice, or whatever you choose from these medicines into the canula — in the ear —, and then insert the ray under the skin and press with your hand to make a compressed wound so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing aid and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should already be softened with a small amount of fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you have distilled in the ear is not too severe, because the ear medications do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Capital .VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of earache.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes certain children have an inflammation of their parents' bellies that is not perforating, and this also happens in some adults, an inflammation of the tissue inside the ear due to a plague or a wound, nothing external; and sometimes this inflammation is in the area surrounding the hole of the ear, which is not always apparent.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And those that occur in the area surrounding it, which do not comprehend the cause, are in the most difficult situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in those where you can perceive the cause, take the patient's ear to the sunlight and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if an abundance appears, open that delicate blade of which this is the shape.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the blade where the width is required has one side sharp and the other not; and the blade is of two lengths to prevent it from cutting into the skin.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the enlargement is due to flesh grown in the earl or in the body of the blade, then take those delicate scissors and cut with a sharp ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the enlargement is in the root of the earl, then take a thin knife and heat it with a little fire, and then insert it into the flesh of the earl.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have sensed an enlargement as something that the patient finds easy to remove, due to its urgency, exert pressure on it to facilitate its removal; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the earl.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place it (the cloth) on the affected area according to the width of the wound you have wrapped with the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the ulcer or take some and pour it into waters and sprinkle over it after every third day and use it; if the ulcer has already formed a crust, be careful not to destroy the water and replace it with another water that you wrap in cloth that is made of oil or grease, until the sore cauterized wound yields. And then tend to it so that it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a flow of pus occurs, then immerse a clean cloth or drape in hot water and place it on the affected area, and use another treatment that you have prepared to stop the flow of pus, as mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of atherosclerosis affecting the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Moisturize the eyelids of the eyes sometimes become dry, sometimes moist.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So it is necessary that you have these tools or scissors, and cut off the rough edges from their roots, and then place your hand over the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If the pain flows with hot blood venously, then you should cauterize them with a subtle antilithic cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to make incisions and return them when there is no cause for their roots; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Motas visible on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some condition, resemble great strength and hardness, hence they are called cataracts.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an addition of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them considers when the great size is proceeding from what appears on the eyelid and is reduced entirely; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, cut along that narrow fissure, and extrude it entirely with ease, and then suspend that one from above, and cut and separate that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped with the beginning of it, but only penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then this will not notice any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, you adjust it with a stitch; and treat it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is minor, you will not suffer greatly because the heat of the poultice restores and incarnates it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is decreasing within the folds of the eyelid, you must remove the surface, lift the eyelid, and suspend the enlargement with a stitch, other than what you initially desired, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid itself is elongated for some reason, this should not be noticed in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with hot compresses until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Regarding the treatment of the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is an inflammation caused by the growth in the layers of the eyelid above, and it most often appears in children, aggravating their eyes and leading to their discharge; and due to this, they cannot see the clarity of the sun as tears accumulate on their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you apply these to their faces all the time and while they sleep; and as a result, the eyebrows on their eyelids become moistened, already covering inflammation, and the imminent occurrence of discharge appears in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acuteness within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And certain techniques of operation are used when the hernia is in the thigh, and a cloth is placed over it and cold applied; then the hernia is formed according to the amount that contains the seed from all sides, and the aforementioned is placed on top of it and pressed with your fingers throughout so that discharge accumulates in the middle of the ring, and then ends in the middle of the other by applying a humid spatum to the fissure according to its extent, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place the heated knife in the opening and completely cut through until you reach the cavity, for in the most advanced cases, the cavity itself is blocked by a white, grainy deposit.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those rags that you have wrapped around the affected parts outside and twist them between your right and left hand until they are completely severed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to pull back the edges of the opening, so that the spatulum does not go beyond and tear it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust the fissure a little more easily until the process begins; and then extract those rags that we have mentioned; and subsequently immerse them in water and vinegar, apply pressure over the area, and sprinkle on some powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then some who squeeze salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to draw out that which is removed by that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attend to that inside which must be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If it happens at the infected site with caution, then treat it with plaster until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the ways of examining through touch.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes there are growths due to natural aging, and these become painful, causing constant tears and softening of the eyelids, which leads to the destruction of the eye that is called "tactinir of the eye," and its cure is in four ways: either with a pointed cautery over fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization; or by incising and stitching them; or with canes, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so take care to place the head of the patient in a low position; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where the lid is stuck, and let the needle penetrate through the thread onto the lid, close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and pull the thread away from the lid and turn it to the side.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then, within the gap between the eyelid and the hairs, carefully cut with a scalpel the thread that joins the greater lacrimal to the lesser; remove the thread and place the eyelid gently using small cotton or cloth swabs, then press it firmly with your finger, forming a shape like a mitten.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to consider that the shape should be adjusted according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those with greater swelling will require a deeper cut into the eyelid.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut open the space between the two lines that you have identified, starting from the lacrimal gland greater to the lacrimal gland lesser.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fracture is near the natural hairline, it should be treated with equal severity as that of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it entirely, and adjust the stitching of the two lips with glue or fine wool, clean the pus, and make what is superfluous of the medications adhere to both eyebrows for certain reasons, if you wish, but if not, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then, after three or four days, examine the stitching of the medications and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plague open without stitching, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the plague and the addition of medications; but more stitching is better. Thus, I have told you the ancient remedies for this.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Despite the stress placed on the patient, it is a good operation, and there is no cause for fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat it, where one sees on the eyelid a growth resembling a cherry, and then lifts the eyelid with three incisions, separating and bringing it together in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, having made the incisions, and it does not heal equally, take a needle with a thread and insert one into the center of the growth, and the other two close to the lacrimal ducts, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal, then raise your hand in the same elevation as before, lifting the entire eyelid over the area where it was grown.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs after your incision or fistula, treat it with cerate and resemble it, and anoint it with fire.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, it is necessary for the eyelids that their hairs turn, so use what we have mentioned above regarding incision; however, a more artificial suture is often used in some.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Inserting needles is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within according to what I have mentioned; then, using a needle or two thin splints whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and whose width is proportional to the width of the space, do as follows:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each split, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Nearby, add some subtlety to what superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the vessels of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the cord by the tightness will die and be rejected, and it will become relaxed until it falls on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and then treat the infection until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of making two vessels according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of sharp pimples on the skin with an agule when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp pimples in the skin, the operation on them requires that you use a subtle needle and insert it into that delicate fiber, and then adjust the edges of it carefully and gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the fibers should be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you insert another subtle needle below it briefly, and adjust the edges if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a small position, close to the sun, so that your work is revealed, for it is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then carefully insert the needle into the root of the hair where it is necessary, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair from its root and insert it into the oil, taking care that there is only one or two or three hairs, and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then gently pull your hand away, removing the hair from the oil into the eyelid, along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the hair is not removed from the oil and remains stuck to the eyelid, re-insert the needle into the same point where you made your incision, until the oil is completely extracted from the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then examine the wound for its appearance, as you remove the oil and thread, gently pressing around the wound, and leaving the bandage on for two or three days, until the hair attaches to its place and a new skin grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you adjust a longer natural hair, making it elevated to that extent that it covers some space, and then you raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	**Capitol XIII.**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see a condition on the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it's drawn to one side or the other, due to poor healing from a wound, section, or cauterization, and it's called leukoma, and this condition can be either natural or accidental, caused by the healing of wounds, sections, or cauterizations, or similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation is that you open up that healing and separate the edges of it, placing a piece of linen cloth in between them, and then bind them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you should not use the treatment for gout from the causes that dry out, as it only exacerbates the condition and brings about even worse pain than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use those treatments that soften it as well, such as fenugreek, and immerse in water where the seeds are cooked, or in distilled alcohol, which is liquified with one of the oils, and apply to the affected area.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the key to your treatment is that you pierce through every part that is not solidified according to the shape that you observe at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the curvature that does not return to the original form as observed.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the care of a fracture which is done on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This fracture, which is done on the lower eyelid, is actually not called a fracture; it is either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental fracture can be caused by a blow, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operating on it is that you take a needle with a double thread and insert one end into the flesh, and pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart from its attachment with the needle and cut with a sharp knife when you have separated it from the needle, making an ample incision.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus, the shape of the eyelid is restored according to what it should be; if not, take a reed and press that into the split shape, and turn the eyelid, and make both slits in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both slits should be at two angles of the incision you have made, where they meet, and the angle between them should form their figure when they converge.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then push the flesh away from that part which has been left open, where the eyelid is.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then bring the separated parts together and attach them with wool thread; also, apply those treatments involving the moistening medications and cold compresses as necessary to promote healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase the opening by incision or suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid as previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the discharge between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discourse on the treatment of incision when it is elevated or left open, allowing it to heal, according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that form varies in many ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare various means by which they can return the affected part to its natural shape or close to it, and treat that malady according to what suits them in the operation and with the best tools at hand.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, it makes the eyelid seem solid and fixed above the white part of the eye, hindering the ease of natural blinking and movement. Therefore, you must insert your finger between the eyelid and its edge, and gently lift or extend it away from the corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you carefully cut the adhesion with a thin spatula, not cutting too deeply, slightly blunting the edge to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation, and removing the spatula without damaging the eye's sensitivity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your cut should excise the adhesion with ease, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural position and ensuring that all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then, put salt water on the eye, which you wash it with; or distill steam from the sun, dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with cold water, and place a cloth soaked in honey over the eye, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI**
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	**On the incision of the eye and the prominence of the carnal tissue of the eyelids.**
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	**You know that an eye can be in two ways, either it is nervous and resembles a delicate glass chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling frozen white humidity; when this is pierced, the fluid is expelled, and the chip does not remain.**
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	**Both these conditions do not begin until the larger eyelid is involved, gradually covering the sight and blocking both light and eye movements.**
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of operating in the incision of the hernia is that the patient should lie on their back, open the hernial ring with your hand, raise the upper eyelid with your finger, and then carefully seize the edge of the hernia with the thumb and little finger of one hand, making a gentle fold with it.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the edge of the hernia using a horsehair or similar thread, slowly duplicating the end of the needle, and placing it in the middle of the nail. Penetrate the hernia with the needle, tie the thread to the nail, extend it upwards, and remove the hair from around the pupil's edge.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And also, cut the thread with the hair inside the hernia's opening.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then, using a fine spatula or small scissors, incise the skin at the root of the tear duct, removing the mucous membrane to prevent continuous discharge of tears during the operation.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the ungual (nail) is extended or detached, as we have said, and then it should be carefully extracted with a surgical lever of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware not to touch the tunica cornea with the lever, lest it rupture, and that the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision in the hernia using a little salt or sharp stone, and leave it open for the next day; and then take care of it so that it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not infected and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it attached to that finger, then pay attention to this type of nail being cured with medicines, and thus healed as well as if it were cut off at the joint.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then open the hernia wound of the patient and take a fine lever with a sharp point according to this form:
am subtilitat.	With care and subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that the infection is so severe and stuck in the wound that it emits a bad smell, or becomes pus or a putrid discharge, then apply a poultice to it for the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation until everything infected is removed; otherwise, a foul smell will spread, so you must quickly treat the onset of infection until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that wound until it heals.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the lacrimal tissue, if noticed in the wound causing great pain, should be suspended immediately; then incise it from that one side, and do not close the incision to prevent the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then gently distill the strong and effective tear in the lacrimal passage until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of gallstones and that which arises from contracted flesh in the bowels.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the bowels of certain individuals, diseased flesh is formed, and it becomes so enlarged that it covers the pupil, or it protrudes closely to the outside or draws the eyelids inward, and strongly presses on the eyeball, causing it to be held together by a framework like a bulwark.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But in the operation on it, the disease must first hold its place in the small intestine; then open the bowels of that part and collect all the flesh with the appropriate instruments, and to this end use either a forceps or a basket; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful that you do not damage the bowel during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And this is the suggested translation: "And it is your incision, with which you cut these or scoop out the pus that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small scissors with which you collect it according to the form it takes closer to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle it with powder made from herbs and resembling corrosive medicines, and place a clean bandage over it until you are sure there will be no abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you notice any cause of swelling and it is painful, and you are worried about an abscess, leave the wound and treat that abscess with whatever medicine is suitable for that abscess, and then repeat the operation on that part until it heals, and do what seems right regarding the flesh attached to this wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must avoid any complete cure of the acute wound by natural or accidental means, using fire, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Collection of sabers in the warehouse.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The saber arrives bent, its edges protected over the warehouse and prevents access to its operation; the warehouse remains open for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider if the warehouse where the saber is kept is strong and free from other ailments except for the saber itself, then you should collect that saber.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on a small cushion, and suspend those veins with a pin or two, according to your prudence; and let that pin have a subtle, double prong, following this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two pins, gradually in a body, following this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gently compress those veins with subtle forces, in a subtle manner, and drain the blood at the appropriate time, until you see those veins filled with humors and turned red.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to touch the pain in the extremities of the wound; and if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, be very firm in your operation and only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, distill the hot liquid into the wound, either green or red, so that its sharp acidity dissolves what has been extracted from the blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to collect all of this at once, then apply a poultice to it, which relieves the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and there is no risk of infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on him according to the manner of the disease until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of raised nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat a raised nose with cautery or sharp medicine according to the disease's nature, and it is not healed, do not apply any bandages to it; instead, make incisions over the affected area after waiting for its maturity, and extract all the moisture present within until the bone becomes visible.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and there is decay or blackening in it, take a tool with this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an acute headache, and it is made of fire, and the head becomes red where the point is made by pricking with a lime or alkali-based point (thus as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And press that over the corrupt part of the bone, then slowly turn it between your fingers, and gently press your hand until you know that corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This should be done at certain times, and then the place is restored using drying and stopping agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh there and the body is separated from the sanie and romance for forty days, and it is not renewed or apopthetic, and no accidents occur to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not in a good state for healing, reduce the fissure to the shape of the nail, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover according to the bones that are fixed with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take hold according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the tool be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument first extended within the extremity in such a way as it reaches thus far.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, specifically on the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand within so that it penetrates all through the bone, and you will feel the pain as it seeks to escape from there when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you will now restore the area with astringent medicines that dry out as required.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh no longer fills the space, the matter that had discharged outward to the openings returns inside, thus alleviating the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the hernia's bulge.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and does not give way to manual pressure or reduction, it is necessary to relax the patient, and as you continue, perform a scarification of the cervix with sucking for good drainage; then apply over the hernia a liniment made of mullein and aloe and henna and sarcocolla, and tighten the bandage over the hernia with moted powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the powders is that you take linen cloth from the lion's fur, and each cloth is folded in four parts; and make those powders from them.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then arrange them one over the other according to the amount of hernia that requires it.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And tighten them over the linen with a strong, firm bandage; repeat the suction with the ventoses for good drainage; and then remove the ventoses and leave the hernia tight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And at night, as well as during the day, hold the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is well, but if not, repeat the application of poultices, compresses, and ventoses until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	**Chapter XXI.**
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the eminence of the uvular tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uvular tunic, and it is distinct and processed by removing the eyelids with a gentle pull, and the shape of the eye is thus exposed, and you wish to make an incision, then the operation on it should be as we have recommended: insert the needle at the edge of the uvula, starting from below, in the direction of the lacrimal part, and another needle should pass through it with a double thread from the same side; then make an incision at the point where the double thread is, and raise that segment of the uvula along the needle, and cut it off.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle, placing it over the humid wool soaked in a mixture of honey and wine, and wait until the thread falls off by itself.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then apply the humid wool to it, providing comfort until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from all directions, around a circular piece of cloth, placing the wool with great emphasis, then perforate it with a delicate spatula that reaches the surface of the wool, allowing the albumin humidity to escape, and remove the wool and replace it after some time.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of eyes.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alcionat is nothing but a healthy condition that adjusts itself in the affected area, resembling descending water, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of working with this condition is to stop the disease from advancing in the affected, left, and right parts, and then take hold of its head with both of your hands from two sides, and as you see the health returning to the divided areas, make sure it does not descend, and prevent light from reaching it. Thus, the illness would see its causes in this way.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If, however, the descent of the health is not prepared in the way we have said, then stop the disease between your hands and take a fine, sharp instrument to that place above the panniculus, just before the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea on the crown (at the site desired), until the health is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is gone, you will distill the warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured as the other causes have been healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water coming from the lung.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in division and what suits to puncture on the tongue, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you understand that you should remove the illness between your hands on a clean cloth and tie its tongue tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand close to the patient's eyelid, if the water-bearing eyelid is the left one, use your left hand; or if it is the right eyelid, use your right hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand if the pain is on the left side; or use your left hand if the pain is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then hold the end of the finger near the edge of the eyelid, considering the thickness of the tear in the inner corner of the eye, and gently press the finger while turning your hand towards that side.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the eyelid pocket and feel that the finger has already reached it due to pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it should be noted that the measurement of the path of the finger to the point (the corner of the eye) corresponds to the measurement of the space between the pupil and the edge of the black circle (the iris); this is the crown of the eyelid; so you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the alm (or some kind of compress) into the area where the water is, and pull it down once, then up another time, and thus, as the water descends, you will see the affliction upon which its sight rests, and alm on its wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; so when the water has descended, you will relax that other time before the alm is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it stops descending and does not come down, then extract the alm with ease, turn your hand a little by little, dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in the water and wash the wound inside; then remove the swollen or stopped or woolen bandage soaked in warm oil and honey and apply it to the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But for us, and those of our time, we do not apply such treatment with warm honey as much anymore.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not comply with your knowledge in the use of the instrument into the wound due to its hardness - which is one of the men for whom the wound is hard to bear -, then know that you take the spatula which is called 'alberid' whose form this is:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce that joint, and do not stop your hand on the tract, and it is only then that you make a subtle place for knowledge.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert knowledge as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, prepared for the sick bed, carefully made so that they sleep on their backs in a dark house, and prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And attend to the nature of it so that its true nature is revealed, and do not distort their heads towards the right or left in any way.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And according to its disposition, the ligament should be treated on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then, in that dark matter, he should examine the root cause and make it visible, and after identifying the issues, return the ligament by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And be aware that this should not be done during the hour of treatment or sometimes, if it is an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You have noticed that this happens because the water tends to evaporate rapidly due to its great heat and force of observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If it is a mild apoplexy, then be aware that after the seventh day, you should straighten the affected part and correct any deviation with water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should close your eyes and focus on the patient's mouth, regulating the flow of air from it for several days during this dark period.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually and carefully consider its nature and discuss its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in alchemy the student is not excused from seeing some things at times, and then it is up to you to be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already succeeded in understanding some of those who are with alchemy, and someone said to make fire in the air with a magical syringe through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you should not think that this is completely new to our land, nor is it written in any of the ancient books, and it may be a novelty.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the ways of the spices of magic, so that it may be about those who ignore those.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this subtle triangular shape, the acute end thus with it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various types of flesh are born, some due to a gathering of blood from the feet or polyps, and this illness is called polyp because it resembles that particular foot.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, pale, of thin color; and from it comes the flesh of the lion, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those who have this lion flesh, neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you must cut the injury between your fingers and place it in the sun, and dry the nose of it, and pick at the small spots in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and then cut what you have understood of them with a fine blade between the partitions, knowing that all the flesh is held together; if there is any cause from which this separation could occur, then use a sharp instrument at your disposal to do so.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it is an infected or acute abscess, then apply it to what it covers; but if it is of malignant abscesses, then incise and cauterize that which has been separated, leaving the cavities intact.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then carefully prepare the wound, making an incision with great precision and applying either water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the wound is open and you apply moisture to it through the palate, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate according to how it covers, then know that inside there is no flesh but pus over bones of the nose to which the incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must insert the instrument carefully into him where there is any obstruction, and use it gently, placing between each tooth the amount of the said instrument or less, and remove the obstruction and insert one end of the instrument into the naris either by force or for another reason that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And moreover, when this has been done, it releases its fragrant odor so that it reaches the nasal canals, and is held in place over their soft tissues; for many times children at school are made to do this, and it is a light cause for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the instrument, one end emerging from the nose and the other entering into the nose, and apply a pressure on the flesh around the teeth that are in the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the teeth of the instrument.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the instrument, place a cool compress on the nose, and do this for three days or more until the pain is completely absorbed by the ointment.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If the treatment comes to an end, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument, called a distiller, which extracts oils and medicines from plants:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small lamp with a small opening at the top, and fill it with something resembling ash.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube from cane, and the tube of the distiller should be flat and open; it should have a handle at the end, which you hold when you heat oil or water that you want to extract from the sucs and absorbed causes within.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these herbs are precious: take castor oil, white willow bark, ginger, and saffron piletre, long pepper, scabbard (plant), and epithym (a type of spice), all mixed with vinegar and made into pills; one pill should be taken with warm water, applied to the affected area.
Capitol .xxv.	It appears that your message contains only a chapter title, "Capitol .xxv.", without any accompanying text for translation. If there is specific content from the chapter or further context you'd like translated, please provide it.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow on the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Various symptoms appear as a growth on the ends of the nose; it swells and increases in size over several days until the condition of it becomes noticeable.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should pay attention to the beginning of its appearance and eradicate it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply a heated cautery or medicine that burns over the area where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the operation takes too long and becomes inflamed, consider if it is tender, hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation. Then do not touch that part with a hot iron because it is an abscessed cramp; for the pain experienced by anyone who incides this abscess is due to great harm to him or her.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is painful but not dark in color and the incision is possible in that area, then evacuate the pus and cut into it without much fear, and treat the place with a liquid that will drain and heal it until it is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Chapter XXVI**
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when the continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, it causes little concern in the operation on some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those, considering it a fresh plague or its corruption, then you adjust the two edges of the plague with sutures and subsequently care for the inside so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the rupture of continuity are already separated and each part is healthy, then you must extract each segment from its neighboring tissue so that it does not become infected.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then you adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and tripe on those, and place a piece of fine plaster or some other consolidative plaster over it, and leave it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the plaster and take care with ointment so that the wounds heal by themselves.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique of suturing is that you add the solution for continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as it has been explained to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Capitol XXVII.**
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that come in both lips during the divisions within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	You often observe various conditions in many individuals during the divisions within their lips; some have hard apothems resembling errant grays, and others have larger or smaller ones.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should remove the lips and cleave each of those hard conditions from every part, and then fill the void with a clean thread while the wound is still fresh, and afterwards wash it with wine and apply a poultice to the spot that has been punctured, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of tissue attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Cutting tools should not be placed on the attached gum tissue that ancient physicians called "albulus". Therefore, you must either suspend it or hold it with forceps and make an incision along its edge, allowing the blood to flow or pus to drain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply pressure over the area with a compress or other astringent or caustic powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that tissue returns, make another incision secondarily and cauterize it, for the cautery should not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Due to the reason of teeth aching.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth within and between the gums there are rough, sharp edges, some blackened and some discolored, due to this corruption penetrating the gums, and the neighboring teeth are also affected, they become citrine or green in color.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should close the space between your thighs, place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and pull out the teeth where these rough edges appear, causing a similar sensation to sand, without any visible cause, and this leads to the darkness, citrinity, and other colors as they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this remains as in the beginning of the reason, so be it; otherwise, you should repeat the reason about these to the other parts each day, and on the second and third days, until you reach the final statement in what you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various types of precise tools and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the tools with which a tooth is extracted from within are different from the tools used to extract teeth between each other, and these forms of tools that you will prepare should be as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth from its pain with all possible care and time in its complete eradication, for there is no reason to replace it once it is extracted, as it is a sublime substance whose absence is the justification for its eradication.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	You may also understand that when the disease forces you to extract a tooth, it is essential that you are certain which tooth is causing the pain, as deceiving the pain can lead to mistaking a healthy tooth for a diseased one, and extracting the wrong tooth will not cease the pain until the diseased and painful tooth is eradicated, as we have seen this in the operations of barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, once you have certified that the painful tooth is, and know it well, you will cover it with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gums entirely, and then carefully make incisions with your fingers or small forks, little by little, until the tooth falls out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use pliers with strong jaws for good speech or a firm bite, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them, to prevent any injury, and carefully extract the tooth in such a way as not to break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if that is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and put it beside the tooth with all ease and effort to facilitate its removal as it was at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, you must cover that decay with a cloth and tighten it with the tip of a fine needle to prevent it from coming out when you apply pressure with your pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification carefully around the entire gingival margin, and maintain your strength so that you do not tear or break it open again, and return to the patient for further treatment if the malignity is greater than the initial pain of the condition.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless attempts at removal, for these actions do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, they often bring about great illnesses in men, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these ailments, or some of them, or even certain bones from the mandible, as we have witnessed with our own eyes.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then perform the eradication of it, wash your mouth with vinegar or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if pus flows from it, as is often the case, then, as we have witnessed, you should squeeze out some quantity of egg and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg is not available, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The design of the forceps should be delicate, with a fine grip, suitable for extracting a tooth from its beginning, both from the external part of the tongue and also from a short and thick manipulation, so that they do not bend when performing these tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should also have thick handles for when you first use them, so that they are not bent; instead, their ends should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	These are made of Indian iron with right-angled ends; on the ends of these are teeth that interlock with each other and start by strongly constricting descent, and sometimes the ends of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak, which is curved, and they are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter XXXI** (Note: This is a placeholder heading based on the formatting, as the text provided does not contain any identifiable chapter titles or numbers in a recognizable format.)
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is stuck for any reason, you should place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the location becomes softened. Then insert some pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanta, which resembles forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be cut with a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey the instructions regarding these pliers or tongs, then you should lie down and expose all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a small lever with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should have a short thick end and not be smoothed over so that it does not get stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, this is it; otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at its end, with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now, with this instrument, having two inclines, the appropriate form is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; for it is done with this tool, similar to a large knife, and its form is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a triangular end, either bent or straight, of certain thickness, and not encrusted so that it is not jagged.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools for drawing teeth are similar in appearance to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans, through their own study, discover for themselves according to what the operation means and various ailments; for there are ailments to which the ancient ones did not give name or pause with their proper instruments, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is about the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth, or if there is a fracture, then apply gentle pressure to that area in its proper place using the instruments and forceps we have mentioned regarding the extraction of teeth, and assist with the gesture which this shape requires.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And for any lump, little by little, and whether it is tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or protrude until the bone is completely extracted, then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small breach in the bone, then quickly remove that part and clean it, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of the prominent teeth among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent in an unnatural way due to their shape, particularly in women, especially young and chaste ones; then consider: if it is not possible to extract or clean that tooth, then root it out; rather than leaving it attached to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument which resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made in such a way that you cut off the tooth after several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not affect any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to friction, then file it with this iron lime file in the shape of:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of this is from Indian iron and the margin precisely; and it has many small points as if with a lime, whose edge is sharpened day by day easily, so that there is no other tooth like it that cuts and hurts.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then measure that at the end, and cut it with some other scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is the tooth from which a piece has broken off and affects the tongue, then you must file that edge where the fracture's sharpness is trapped and embedded, and smoothen it so that the tongue does not get hurt or the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital (or Heading) .XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by concussion and removal due to impact or extraction, and the patient cannot bear the pain, having tried various stiptics, then one must resort to those that are tightened with gold wire, not silver, because silver corrodes and soon becomes useless, while gold remains unchanged forever.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the correction is to take the wire and bend it twice between two healthy teeth, or if there is only one or two gaps, ensure that the wire reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the stitching within the gap from which you began, and tighten your hand with facility and wisdom, lest it be damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the strain you apply with which to tighten the wire must be such that it does not cause the teeth to loosen.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the excess thread ends with forceps or scissors, and insert them at various points by gesture, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then bind it tightly with a Roman bandage.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes unfastened or torn, tighten it or those parts with another thread in such a way that they remain tight at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, thus when these ligatures are tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two returns to their proper place in their respective locations, and they are grown back as we have recomposed, then they become renewed.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is only achieved by skilled artisans and wise men.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes, it is found that the cause of this condition is a bone from a cow, shaped somewhat like a tooth, which is placed in the area where the tooth is missing, and held tight as we have said, remaining and serving in that position for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found in the tongue sometimes stops speech, either because it is a natural condition or due to an accident that occurs as a result of a plague which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, making its jaw no longer exist in place; raise their tongue, and then carefully cut that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any stiffness or resistance in that area, which is due to the hardening of the disease, then you apply oil and split it apart with your fingers until you can separate the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause any rupture in the flesh, and split open the rear part, and let the pus flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then, wash the dressing of the incision with hot water or vinegar or clean water; and place a cloth over it; it is best to keep the tongue out of the way during this time, as any pressure on it may harden the condition again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus flows, apply vitriol to the area; if the pain is sharp, cauterize the area with a hot iron suitable for this condition.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the treatment addressing the other causes until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section marked "Capitol .xxxv." without including the actual content or text. To provide assistance, I would need the textual data from that chapter for translation or analysis. If you can share the text, I'll be happy to help with your request.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extracting the sac (ranula) with the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	In some cases, the tongue becomes inflamed and resembles a small, stiff lump, preventing its natural movement; it is greatly swollen and fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for it is that you open the patient's mouth wide, facing them towards the light, and examine the inflammation.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you notice a dark, hard lump that the patient cannot feel due to numbness, then do not touch that area which is brittle.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white and is moist, insert your fingernail into it, cut it with a fine spatula, and divide it entirely; if you have good ventilation during the time of your operation, place a zigzag veil over it, provided it constricts the flow of air.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely treated it, after washing it with wine and salt; and tend to the other remedies for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of the abscess from two ears and that which is in the throat, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an inflammation in the throat occurs, there are glands that are gathered closely together, which protrude outside and are called "two ears," which, when you treat them with what has been said above, and they do not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the disease is of a certain nature and the root is thick, do not cut it with a knife due to the flow of pus; instead, let it mature within, and either you will extract it or it will break off on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, hard, and the root is thin, then that must be carefully incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in view of your operation, if the abscess has already rested and been healed completely or if it has decreased in size; then make an incision against the disease under the sun, with the head of the instrument in the lower part, opening its mouth, and a servant taking hold between his fingers of the patient's tongue with a delicate instrument of this form.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or brass, and the blade should be thin and sharp.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press against that place with your tongue and the point is shown to you, then take a needle and stick it into that flesh, and draw it out of the body as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then cut with an instrument whose shape is as follows:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is constructed like forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the point of each of those is in the opposite direction, very sharp, made of iron coated with steel.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spade whose shape is as follows: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut a wound, cut the other in the same manner of incision, and then close the incision of the patient with hot water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, rinse with a decoction of grain or myrtle leaves similar to the causes of the stoppage until the flow of blood ceases and then treat it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, there are other appendices or those two auricles, and you incise them as you have seen and said in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman for an abscess that was born in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she was on the brink of death if more time passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already punctured so much that it had created two openings through which pus would flow.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, listen to me attentively and stay in one of their wounds, pull out that one, and the discharge from it is a great portion; then you should inspect where you understand the other injury is coming from, and then close the mouth of it, and grasp its tongue, and then leave the wound in that position.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you should cut out a large part of it, and there is not much discharge from it but some blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, it is absolutely necessary for that woman; and soon after she begins to drink water, and take food, so you should not continue to incise those wounds again for a long time, but rather let each one heal in its place, which incision prolongs that condition.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply this and cauterize the wound of the patient, thus adding to it; and also walk around and do not clean what God has done for that patient.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the hernia when it is located.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh is in the hernia, and it is located and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is on the side, thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	In cases where the treatment mentioned in the previous section is not effective, and the hernia has already formed into a hard mass, it is necessary to incise that which is round; but if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, either dark red or black, and there is no sensation in it, then one must be cautious with the incision, for fear of aggravating the condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you must relieve the patient and press the hernia with an instrument that shapes it, then move it down and make an incision with one of two instruments used in the procedure known as the inscizio de dos mellas (incision of two wounds).
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert anything that is contrary to the natural order of its addition, for if you insert more than necessary, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then, make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and heal it so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision, use cunning in the cauterization of it to calm their fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is nothing but sharp fire, and this is how you place the head of the patient on the table, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply that as a living force, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of it be concave in which the medicine is placed, just like the concave part of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the inherent nature of the medicine, so as not to cause any harm to their throat.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the throat by making space for a while until it becomes weakened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, immerse the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap in a pipe-like manner until the wrap adheres to the pipe, and do this as many times as necessary so that you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then remove the cauterization from the ulcer with a cloth soaked in the medicine, clean that which is in the patient's wound with the same medicine, wash it with warm water, apply external remedies, and use internal treatments until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this specific type of treatment is much safer than incision and free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is cured with something more subtle than cautery or incision, and this is done through sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scorzonera, chamomile, broad (possibly a type of herb), and similar ones from among the herbs, and address all those causes, or some of them, in a single mixture, and let them be submerged in wine and boiled; and the wave should be beaten decently with a wooden instrument according to this manner; it should be made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then the extremity should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the ulcer and covers it, so that the ulcer becomes completely obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process for any remaining spots that appear dry, but be careful not to perform this treatment during the acute phase of the disease, as it might over-irritate the affected area and you should only proceed if you have properly diagnosed the hernia (apostema) through cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and, at the end of it, make a hook with wire, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, because the hook of the wire prevents the internal gas from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of splinters and substances adhering to the skin, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may observe substances adhering to the skin or splinters of nails or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then, you should extract what is apparent from these, examining it with the eye, after having pressed your tongue against the instrument, in order that you may clearly see what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if something appears hidden in the stomach and is beyond your knowledge, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the powerful cause attached to the stomach will be forgotten through vomiting; or let the patient swallow some piece of nap or finely chopped lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed, twist it tightly with a needle, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spines and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	You may take a snake and twist it with a needle, place it on the table and extract it carefully; or take a reed and carefully pull out its inner core.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes are not forgotten, then use an iron instrument in the following manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And make it a thick wire with a thin point, and at the end of it, there should be a concave part that you insert into his mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And he raises his head up and be careful of the touch of his bone in the throat, so that he understands what causes him pain, whether it is from a bone or a spine, or how that doctor places his hand on him.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if that patient has more pain, it is better because of his knowledge of the place where the cause resides and he pushes it down and pulls his hand with the instrument towards him, all according to the amount prepared for him until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter XXXIX.**
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating phlegm as we have discussed in the division of treatment with medicines and it does not correspond, consider the throat of the patient at sunset, since you will have to use an instrument to extract his tongue, which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that small or subtle swelling decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the swelling, take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, then place over the concavity of the needle a hot iron, and do this several times (as long as the blood flow stops and the swelling is removed from the wound) and keep the patient on water for the rest of the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of that water and change it every hour or so, as the blood will soon absorb the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If we have not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with spices or asafoetida using the instruments we have prescribed for the suffumigation of the throat.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls in the right place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operation through suffocation of that is that you take a cloth in which are ignited coals and the cloth is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is an opening, and it is on that opening that the tip of the instrument is placed; then apply suffocation from above; and the patient should hold his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffocation is not blown away until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, for the blood flow will fall shortly.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, then you repeat the suffocation with motes again, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eating salty and cold foods, and do not let him drink water, and so it is necessary that at this regimen he should abstain.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the body when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps also, but with some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed over the gullet, and its end resembles a spoon beak, which is called a quile, that is sharpened with lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	**Chapter XL.**
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the whole of the discourse is concerned with the perception of apoplexies and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Apoplexies are special motifs, with various manners of occurrence, according to the recollection of their memories, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their piercing and section in two ways: one is for the specific type of apoplexies themselves; and by what we understand about humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is the locations in which bodily accidents occur, where an apoplexy occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an apoplexy occurring in the fleshy part is different from one occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some pustules are such that they do not need to be pierced, but rather serve as a maturation of the health in those or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other pustules that need to be drained when they form crosses and are not mature according to their size, also include those that occur near joints, where a pustule forms close to a joint, the condition of it persists as long as you can see it in the circulatory system of the body, and it strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, leading to the contraction of that member; or it is a pustule near a major limb, and if you delay piercing it until it has matured, it will affect the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, so you should pierce the one that has not matured; and do not drain the crusty one, unless it is one forming near the anus, where you cannot drain it from the inside, but rather it elongates into the anal fissures within the buttocks, and a fistula forms or some other condition in its place.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You also know the time to drain the pustule, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that recovery has begun when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in rigidity and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And furthermore, know how to recognize when the incision should be made in the location of the abscess and when pus is present as a result of healing of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The incision should always be made through the skin or flesh, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, the incision should be made according to the member affected.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to wait until the digestion of the pus is confirmed as per our previous discussion; for if you make an incision there before, it prolongs the course of the disease and intensifies the pain and swelling around it, making it deeper.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	You may make some incisions through the thickness of the flesh or body part as required, or according to what the member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large appointments, a great perforation and wide sections according to the diversity of the size of the appointments.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of appointments where it is necessary that the skin be turned in and cut, when thus done as if bread and made is in a term that already exists, so as those that occur in cases of doubt and abscesses.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section with three angles; and of those where it is incised thus like the figure of a myrtle leaf, so as the appointments of the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of their kind where a round section and lunar section is administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If that one has no such problem when the surface wounds are minor, then you should make a shallow or flat incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the wound is deep and has already collected a lot of pus, you should make an incision and do not be concerned about extracting all the pus at once; after removing a portion, wait until the next day and then remove another piece, increasing the size gradually according to the degree of healing.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a frail individual, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an elderly person, since the animal spirit moves quickly towards healing, and strongly resists the removal of the wound, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Pay close attention to this chapter, and be careful with the incision you make for these wounds; clean the infections and consider whether the wound of the apostema is small or a flat incision, then administer the appropriate treatments; if the apostema is large and the openings of the incision are deep, then apply pressure on each opening until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a portion of the cord or its concavity is separated, then cover it with thick cloth or thread made from linen, just as you would bandage a cut or wound; tighten it on the third day and treat and heal the inflammation from infections until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer clean water and vinegar mixed together, place a cloth made from linen over the area where the bleeding is happening, and apply pressure.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then you must administer remedies and treatments, and apply powders recommended at various locations of this book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter, and the location of the abscess is in a place with many nerves, then you must soak swabs in hot oil and vinegar, and apply them to the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply cool poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be changed every third day, as we have said, and you should loosen the crust and clean that part and administer what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of all types of hernias generally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned about each type of hernia and its specific way of treatment.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of hernias that occur in the neck region of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck region of the head are small hernias, which are of various types with membranes that contain them; and these types are distinguished by their names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from their glands flow drops, and those contain a moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture similar to sweat, and those that resemble them; and those that are stone-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the removal of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the incision of those does not cause painful resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in incision of those is that you expect those to be in the form of instruments, which are called entromes, as you know that they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what contains is moisture, then you cut those as you separate them according to their length by making a superficial incision in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins at the section of the line B within the line G. Therefore, when the humidity is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause for it, as troops seen returning may indicate some other cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the affected area in Egyptian nettle, if present, or in water and salt; fill it with that plague and leave it for another day, as it corrodes everything that breaks through that crust.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you repeat the application of Egyptian nettle to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause behind that crust; cure the plague with nettle until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with fatty nodes, then you cut into it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have a section without the form of a cross, and cut between the two lips of this section and tear it apart from every side, and use your virtue to extract the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If it causes you discomfort, do what I have first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform in the abscess of the section and treatment as I have told you; and cut over the abscess that is lighter, because it is less painful and has little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are certain abscesses of these which are in the head on some men who have no humidity at all; which causes because you must incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and drain the abscess thus with a hard, blunt, white stone that cannot be chewed, and if anyone were to touch it, they would be infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other instances of accidental apoplexy in the head, different from this chapter, there are such apoplexies that come upon the children's heads and require the removal of the auricles, but the section concerning all these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their division so that the matter of the wound is removed from the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then tend to those affected by it as is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Uncommon instances of these apoplexies occur in the collarbone, armpits, and angles, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those that occur in the colon, and so movements that are generated within them, and all scrofula of those comes from their own tunic, and thus as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, so we have treated.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are movements, some of which are stone-like, and others contain moisture, and some are malicious that do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that case where you perceive good disposition in the touch, of which the color of what is manifest is proper to the color of the ulcer, and it is degraded throughout, and not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or arterioles, and it is neither full nor swollen, you must incise it at the dry superficial part of the ulcer from its position within the body, to the position beyond the body, along the line of G. within the line of B., and remove it from all parts, and cut away the edges of the ulcer with a knife if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses in the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the knife is not sharp, or does not fit in your hand for incision, or causes anxiety to the patient, and you make an unnecessary incision on a vein or nerve, then it hinders your operation; the abscess will fester with vinegar or other powders that prevent pus from flowing out, and it will cause pain and leave a scar until the inflammation of the abscess subsides and the infection begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then carefully inspect the small scrofulous nodules; if any show signs of infection, make an incision and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is at the root of a large scrofula, you must be careful not to incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Furthermore, be careful not to cut that thin, folded string too short, as it might slip and cause harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with warm, thin wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it accordingly.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you completely cut out the scrofula, be careful to close both sides of the wound tightly so that no excessive pus forms.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice that there is excessive pus due to the size of the scrofula, be careful to understand where to cut, remove it, and then stitch it up and apply what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of scrofula that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial piercing at the place where you see the maturation of it, and stop the piercing of what is the base of pus in the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the piercing, you should find and similar things to these, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the plague already cleansed, you should cure it with the ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilot (or membrane) of the abscess, make an incision.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients said that this incision on the pilot (or membrane) was effective, and they have not seen any other thing like it done in their land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In some men there is a deficiency, so the extraction of the stone should be avoided, for by doing so prematurely, all the veins and the major ones related to the illness are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have sores in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the gums, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of stones to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, the stone should be incised below three circles of the stone's circles, or four with a small section in the space between two circles for its quantity, that the incision is in depth, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for an incision because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the stone are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the gauze slowly, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you encounter any cause to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then, we insert the scalpel as recommended; it is meant to section the canal for the flux that is situated here, which is due to something broken and detached from its place, and through the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour arrives for the closure when the opening is feared, add two layers of the gauze cord to the wound, and use one alone for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of our discourse, which we have collected, is to observe that some of these apopthems have already compressed the gullet of the patient, and the malady has entered into the body, and the air of it has been cut off, and some wish to incision the epiglottis so that the malady breathes over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I will order the wound to remain open until the evil of the malady is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; so now I will order the treatment of the wound, and its cure, until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen myself, is that a servant used a sharp object and cut into the throat of the patient, and also made an incision on one part of the lung, and I was called to treat it; and I observed the death rattle as if from a dying person, and discovered the wound, and found the inflammation which had come from the wound's infection.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you shall confess that you have neither cut a vein nor guided the flux, and the air still comes from the plague, and you treated it until the fire of sickness was cured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not press the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section about an abscess that occurs outside the stomach, which is called a stomach hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called stomach hernia, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is divided into two manners, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, it is not subject to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is divided into two manners: one is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is akin to apoplexy caused by the blockage of an artery, which is fearful.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a diagnosis with certainty except for the patient who seeks help.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine the patient and if it appears similar to gouty nodules, and there is no obstruction in any of the veins, then you puncture them thusly with a needle, and extract that which contains the pus from the abscess; otherwise, you should scrutinize the entire body and appropriately treat the area requiring cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the removal of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodules have various shapes and sizes, and as I have already described all the types of their divisions.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important to distinguish between a nodule and an excrescence, with careful consideration.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, one says that an excrescence is a hot condition and fever with violent pains, until the ebullition of the excess subsides; and it is putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A nodule is not hot nor febrile nor painful, but it is like a lion that has been taken from its den and brought to light.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with vacuum, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, as if they were fat and contained humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a node, you must expel that and inquire about the beginning of the disturbance which is called an "intromis", according to how it takes its form in the chapter most appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all nodes; you take this disturbance and insert that into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around there bit by bit until you know that this disturbance has already penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you close your hand according to the measure of the abscess's size, and you extract the disturbance, and consider what has remained in the trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, you insert a scalpel into the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left from the intrusion, then you know it is grave.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, lift it up, and extract the stone from every part with ease, and inspect the pouch or sac if possible over that, and draw out that health from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should repeat this process until it is successfully extracted from within without causing any further damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from the lung arises any cause, either little or much, the nodule returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that from the lung any small part is affected, complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and apply a hot poultice to the one that is infected, and cure the other with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the lung and cure it with this that incrusts.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is pulsatile or not, you cut and apply the place of a trissate seal that is vitriol and let that strangle for two days or three until the plague subsides and the inflammation of the sanc ceases; then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the shapes of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds: one of great size, another of medium size, and another of small size.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of the medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and powerful materials, meticulously designed to perform the instruments in specific incisions.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the shapes of the experts, and they are called blades, and one of them is known as a bore.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And thus, of these three qualities, one is great, another moderate, and a third slight.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experience is like it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the moderate experience is like it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the slight experience is like it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, it is appropriate for those with apoplexy, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are between the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus, they make rounds, thick, leathery, also with large needles sewed to them, and are of ermine, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of ermine.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experience of black plums is used, which remember that by opening these, the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflected, those reflections are reflected back to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, and others middle-length, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the large plum experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the middle plum experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the small plum experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the incisions are of various spices, some being simple curves, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and middle-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their body's humors, there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these humors, there are two types with curves, which are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three types of curves, which are also of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary at their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple great humors, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of the simple lesser humors:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of the simple rare humors, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large wound:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a smaller wound, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a very small wound, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A large wound with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A smaller wound with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A very small wound with two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	A large wound with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A smaller wound with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a needle has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and scrape nodules and abscesses, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but rather rounded in such a way that they do not cause damage to veins or nerves during the scraping of nodules, and for them to heal the disease and bring about tranquil rest, even if some adjustment is required due to the depth of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of weapons, and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a great magnet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a middle magnet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small magnet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and look like rays from which alcohol is produced.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the tip is a pointed spatulal edge hidden, which cuts into the inside and comes out again, as you wish.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the spatulas, which are hidden between these parts during the piercing of the skin and do not harm the patient, are of three kinds: great, middle, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the ways of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of veins through which the blood flows are divided into three types; large, medium and small; their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of thin, round or slightly elongated erys (veins), delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of veins be large, medium and small, so that by them the flow of blood is divided at the right speed when required, and in this way, when you first apply treatment, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using them to divide blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, just as with the veins in the legs, thighs, arms, breasts, abdomen and groin, similar to the veins in moist flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And in some cases, these instruments are made of small blades resembling scalpels according to this form; by which the vein is incised when performed through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the breasts of men, which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some incisions are inflated in the breasts of certain men due to the pressure of sleep when they begin to be hairy, and then the breasts are inflated, and the breasts of women are assembled, and they remain apart, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to treat this, they should incise those sections of the moon according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and adjust both lips of the wound with stitching, and heal what is within so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If a nipple retracts from its attachment and becomes softened due to its magnitude, as is often the case with women, then it should be cut in two parts, its pus drained, and each portion shaped like a crescent moon; each should contain the end of the other, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form of the line B and G. Then excise the cord connected between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and administer what has been mentioned regarding sutures and powders, as necessary for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision as required due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of pus, then fill the wound with a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the hardened matter, and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	**Capitol .xlviii.** (Note: "Capitol" here likely refers to a chapter or section heading, not a physical location.)
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are caused by the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised during the lunar month according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And once all that is within the abscess has been evacuated, you should close it with a strip of cloth and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage in place and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the nodal species or from scrofula, you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula generally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread so much that it causes gangrene, then apply cautery to it as we have mentioned before.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur through archery or vein injuries.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks and the string (or cord) is tightened that is above it, then abscesses are seen to occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when an abscess is from an arrow, a long accumulation occurs in the preceding part of the body; and when you press the abscess, you feel a ringing sensation within.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein turns into the general manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section regarding this abscess is incorrect, especially in those that leave openings, and in the angles, and in the collarbone, and in most parts of the body; and since it is so large, it is necessary to avoid its treatment with iron, and for those in the extremities, or at the head, it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Place a linen over the affected area due to inflammation from archery wounds, cut it in the middle of the thigh; then incise the section with scissors and expose the wound, removing the arrows and tunic until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take a needle and make it penetrate through the other layer, opening the wound at two points—which causes the patient to experience pain due to the removal of two arrows lodged in the thighs.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply pressure to the area between the two ligaments using a spatula until the swelling subsides and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is due to vein section, then you must cover your hand over it as much as possible near the abscess in the thigh, and insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, making it penetrate; then pull out the foreign body from the other side while maintaining the thread double, and bind the abscess with suitable ligature according to what I have said earlier regarding the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might break, insert the needle into the remaining aperture, following the path of the first incision, and tighten your threads at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Next, dry the aperture in the middle part of it; when the swelling has subsided, make an incision into the excess of the cord and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice on it, which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and apply the treatment that is done with heat and cold until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	To complete the treatment of the hernia that occurs due to nerve strain.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, hernias occur in the rear and venous regions; they also seem to occur in the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, or in a similar manner.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is applied to the most painful areas of the legs or feet, or anywhere the joints are troubled.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it affects its largest parts; when squeezed by violent force, a sense of stupor seems to envelop the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an apoplexy affecting the whole body, and therefore the patient remains conscious; it is felt throughout the entire body and does not affect any specific parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it does not indicate that it is caused by iron; for as their pain increases, contraction will ensue.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The person who has it in the head or forehead should bind the neck with a bandage.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a minor abscess, then cut around it and remove that part.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then lift it with a spoon, remove that, and close it; and dress the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs from the wound that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Indeed, some people observe swelling in the abdomens of these individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble mushrooms; the root of those is subtle and the head of them is large; and the edges of those are convoluted, and it is from these that a great deal of discharge is produced.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts which were more functional and similar in appearance, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were everted and cracked, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut these off and tighten the bandage around the foot, one at 18 inches and the other at 6 inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the illness is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of fine size; then you cut them with a broad spatula, and bring near to you hot cautery from the fire, as you have seen the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if the blood comes out, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is fearful and anxious, beware of sudden movements with a sharp instrument; then take fresh lead from a well-prepared mold, tighten that bandage in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been incised and falls out by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is of thick texture, there is no cause for fear or anxiety in its incision, especially in those located in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you incise the bulk of it and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care so that it is cured as the disease heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to cut that which is of a dark color, with little feeling, and regularly shaped, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us recall some further remedies for this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of hernia (or 'eminence' of the navel).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia or protrusion of the navel is caused by various reasons: either through fissures in the abdominal wall above the belly, and the intestine or hernia returns to its cavity as it should in other ruptures; or through a vein or an artery that flows from it (as described above), or due to excessive flatulence confined within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the hernia's protrusion, then the color of the hernia will be similar to that of the body; it will be painful, and its position will vary.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the removal of the hernia, consider the position of that which we have recounted with greater diversity, and when you press on those ties, it is as if they are concealed, then return; it is firmly attached to its own place, and it magnifies the need for much bathing and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, it becomes hard and is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or ruptured.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to scrofula, then these symptoms appear as an abscess turning black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick, and hard, and it is fixed according to its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is hard.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from flatulence; then know that you should refrain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it is taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias by arteria and vena.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then know that you should order the patient to take a few deep breaths and lie down; then gently press around the entire navel, and command them to keep it reversed between your hands on their back, and wrap a broad spatula around the navel in the area where you felt the pressure; and extend the amount of the hernia upwards towards the thighs with gentle force; and then secure the opening with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the hernia by cutting through the ligament and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; and if you have tightened or tied it up with the ligament, then carefully cut it free and gently push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the infection, then take some ointment; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circle that part, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the loop which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will make them penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the location to heal until the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or cut it when it has thickened and can be removed, and then care for it with something that covers the wound until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is only flesh or due to moisture, then cover as you have done with the abscess, thus removing the sanch or moisture which you find in it, and then care for it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure for Cramp.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have discussed, in our previous section, the types of cramp and the manner in which it is treated by medicine, and that cure with iron is to be avoided as it may ulcerate; we also spoke about the causes of cramp and precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that at certain times cramp is in a location where it is possible to eradicate it, as with cramp in the breasts or in the groin and similar places in the other members, to extract everything, especially when it is just beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and severe, it does not respond to treatment, as I have neither seen nor heard of any success in that regard.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said, you should proceed and remove the illness and purge it of black cholera several times, and then cut off that part if a distinct refllux is observed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the hernia for the operation with a preparation in which it is located, and cauterize the incisions that cover it; and carefully explore all parts with the knife to avoid any cause for concern regarding the roots of the hernia.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And do not let the blood flow, nor cut off that part abruptly; squeeze the spots and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument suitable from among the available tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it causes you difficulty to make an incision of a thick vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then care for the other part with the appropriate treatment as long as it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrophobia and the signs of each type, as well as the medicinal treatments for them.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of altitude, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitis or the species of hyposarchea, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrophobic tympanitis with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the disease has been weakened in the patient or it is another malady, other than this type of hydrophobia, similar to those in the throat or abdomen, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for there is fear over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you examine the disease of an exuberant vertute, and it is nothing but hydrops only, without inflammation or aging, then the manner of operating on it is that you lift up the disease between your hands, and apply them appropriately to extract water from the abdomen at the base of the penis, and take a spiny spatum according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts long, with a pointed extremity also like the spatum; however, make it in no way too short, bit by bit, so that during the operation on him, it does not enter the abdomen, and you hold it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydrops is from the intestines, for then you will see that by sectioning near the navel, about three fingers' distance on either side, it opens to the parts beneath.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrops is due to a disease of the intestines, then make your section on the left side of the navel about three fingers' distance.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the formation of it is due to moisture, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your incision is on the side where the pain is located, so as not to spread fluid to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then completely perforate the abscess with the instrument, and insert your hand into the opening, and raise your hand with a spatula between the abscess and the anus, and extract it; and if it is the size of a finger or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the anus until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that, and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or bronze or iron, and at the lower part of it there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is incised according to the shape of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, this will immediately seize upon the instrument, thereby evacuating a large quantity of water in the meantime, for if you evacuate less than necessary during that time, strong pain may result from the resolution of their animal spirit or death may occur.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should evacuate according to the quantity required by the virtue of it and according to your understanding of the patient's condition, based on the virtue of their pulse and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after withdrawing the instrument, retain the water that is caused, for it is retained by the string which blocks the opening over the organ from which it was extracted, and you should perforate that according to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water and do this for several days with caution, beware of error as not to remove too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the condition and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sand, moistening it in a bath, and exposing it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medications until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and the intestines, and extract the water as I have described in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XXV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose birth places are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, certain children are born with a hole in their mother's womb and the head of their mixture (amniotic sac) is not pierced (or it has been cut too early or not in the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should carefully consider the perforation of the womb as soon as a child is born with a thin, subtle discharge in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, in the wound, insert a subtle lead pin and bind it with a cloth, for three days or seven.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, it should be done repeatedly and then return to the bed.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not bind the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over this area will not be effectively prevented from entering.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May the one whose pain is severe be treated with a lead clavicle, as we have said, for many days until it is relieved.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those whose pain is out of place, it is said that the cause lies in a person who is born with a defect or an injury to their bladder, preventing them from urinating properly; until they raise the bladder with their hand above their genitals, and due to this, the semen cannot reach the mother as it should, and it becomes a motley illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The manner of the operation is as follows: the patient lies on their back, and you extend the head of the bladder with your left hand while gently pulling it, then incise the base of the bladder's head at the opening of the urethra using a scalpel, or any instrument you prefer, so that the middle part of the bladder resembles the head of the bladder and the pain is relieved in its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your procedure to drain the pus, for complications may arise from it; stop it from draining and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the alba (a term related to the foreskin) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to decay and corruption, and the blackness and adhesiveness of the prepuce at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Various complications occur with this alba on the penis, and there is an emission of putrid flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some of these are malignant, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For the non-malignant ones, you should suspend them with a subtle hook and cut off that which remains; then place your hand over the affected area with Egyptian niter, and after that, treat it with refined honey until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a dark color, then you must administer cautery near its incision and reason for it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must drain the abscess that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and at the same time, treat the opening outside, because when you cure that opening, the foreskin may still be infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also there are incidents in the genitals and foreskin that turn black and swollen, so you must extract everything that has turned dark or is about to decay or is already corrupt; then apply a line of that which is beneficial, made from flour of millet mixed with crushed and powdered thistle.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an end of blood flow, then apply cauterization monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cautery that is most beneficial is to two dispositions together, either for the flow of blood or for a corrupted ulcer.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the ulcer is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, then insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the ulcer (and this adherence occurs only in those whose foreskin is, and circumcision is not required over it; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess), then with an obtuse spatula, loosen until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the ulcer is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate those exquisitely, then with a spatula, carefully loosen from the head of the ulcer and the foreskin, and thus it is because when the foreskin is thin, its strength is slightly perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, which has already been soaked in hot water to prevent it from adhering again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then, it is necessary to care for the wound with a hemostatic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own making and our own volition, and it concerns children, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the least possible harm for their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not write it in their laws, and this is because we have acquired through experience that it causes great harm to many skilled practitioners and barbers, who use circumcision and purification with razors and hot iron; instead, they use lint and cutting with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And having tried all these ways and not finding better relief than with scissors, lint, or thread in the operation, since the thread moves away from the wound, as the thread of the prepuce is torn into two layers, and the inner one remains, and often it is necessary to make another incision and a sure pain follows.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the operation that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barber-surgeons, is not secure in making an incision at the end of the male member, because a strong tension occurs within the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with hot instruments, strong tension breaks and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and it happens in such a way that it does not need an operation, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the preparation that is done with scissors and thread, I have discovered through experience its true nature, for the scissors are of precise incision, thereby matching the sharpness above with the sharpness below; and thus, when you apply your hand in a measured way at one time, compression of the thread takes place in the form of a circle containing all the pain from every part, to which no error can attach.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understands a little, doing nothing but tying the thread to its hernia and letting it be for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do all you can to make the patient happy in every way that his intelligence allows.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then be sure to prepare everything carefully and do not cause any pain; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over the child's feet so that he does not see the scissors or any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it from filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then, close the wound gently with a folded cloth, tie it tightly with a thin thread near the base, and place your finger over it to indicate the location of the ligature, then cut between the two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, raise the instrument slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; remove the sac, wash it with running water, and place a cloth soaked in a mixture of recently boiled rose oil on it, and leave it there until the next day; treat the wound with this remedy until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the instruments for cleaning, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities are not all of the same length and some are longer than others; the foot's bone structure should have the same angle as two handles, each with the same length.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the correction of this error lies in understanding that the intrinsic tension must not be entirely escaped, or a part of it must be preserved for incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary to stretch the skin of your finger towards the direction of the joint's movement and make an incision according to this equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold your finger's skin towards the joint's movement, then remove it with a knife and make an incision there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and there is an inflammation left from the apithesis (possibly a type of skin condition or injury), then leave it until the inflammation subsides, gently remove any hardened matter, and make an incision according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be mindful of the head of the hernia, as it will not tolerate this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, cure that which the plague solidifies from the powders that we have mentioned in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the cord on measure, and you adhere to its parts, this will not bother it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And make cure for that which we have said, so that it be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or sand, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those of which we have spoken regarding treatment in division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if urine is not discharged and retention occurs due to pressure, which is already in the neck of the bladder, then know that the disease is still bent upon its sides.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on someone else's back and stretch their abdomen away from their back, extending it as far as possible. The disease tightens its hold on them to the greatest extent.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is constricted to prevent the discharge of urine behind, so that it is expelled from the body.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it does not dissolve as we have said, then know that the cause of the disease is vehement, and extract it from the patient with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: Both silver and lion-shaped, with a needle as thin as a long ray, similar to a palm and a half, and a thin cane at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination is as follows: take the folded thread and tie it at the end of a thin thread or string for proper drainage; insert the ends of the thread through the opening left by the urethra, cut them if there is any superfluous cause from the string, but insert them forcefully into the cannula, and then open the urethra with forceps and cover it with a sponge and alum.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make incisions on the patient's belly, open the bladder and the wound with oils such as olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the urethra with ease until it reaches the depth of the wound; fold the wound upwards at the opening of the catheter; push the catheter from inside; and push it until it reaches the bladder, ensuring that the hernia is brought to its proper position, not causing any damage.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then carefully extend the intestines along the small incisions, as urine dries out the intestines.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, using a catheter, do not cease to do this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	**Chapter LIX.**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder cleansing with clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When it happens in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or a congestion of pus forms there, and you wish to drain water and medicines from that place, then use an instrument called a clamp, and this is how it is used:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if its opening at the end is blocked, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three steps: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a congestion, which is what is being pushed, and according to its quantity, it accumulates, until some cause throws off the humidity, which is then expelled, and when it is expelled, it is thrown back, and when it leaves completely, it acts like a clamp that holds naphtha in maritime battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity and throw it against the parts below, for the humidity is thrown back into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp into the wound as we have mentioned in the circumcision; and push the humidity against what you are pushing, for that humidity reaches the bladder soon enough, and the illness focuses on that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is crystalized, and that shape is:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or iron, which resembles a small feather at the top and leaves a mark inside the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder with motion, and place in that humidity which you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then tie it between two firm ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the crystalizer into the vein.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with the humidity and stretch gently until the patient feels that the humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then perforate that circle completely through its roundness; and insert the thread firmly into those channels, turning it as needed; then add the cloth to the water so that it retains the desired humidity, and also smells and tastes.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you insert that into the instrument and make it in the same way as you have made the bladder, and express with your hand while the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	**Chapter LXX (60)**
De extraccio de peyra.	**On the extraction of stones**
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention with the hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they relate that this manifest exposition and concise summary should be followed.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that the disease born in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, appearing cloudy; the illness irritates their pride, causes frequent urination, and when treated, leaves a scar.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that illness becomes easier after they have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it is more common due to what happens between those affected.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And concerning him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is few, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, in order to address this issue, we must begin by cleansing the malady with Christ, which extracts all the opening present in their intestines; for that opening sometimes blocks the flow of urine after its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then, with the malady affecting their feet, position and massage them gently so that the urine descends into the bladder or sometimes, it may leave its place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then apply that compress between their hands, and the patient's hands should be left with things related to them, so that the bladder is completely emptied towards the exit parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then, thoroughly remove that and all other foreign objects.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then immediately cut it off with a scalpel over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch it from the beginning, cover it with oil the specific indication of the left hand, whether the illness is a child or that small seed if it is an adult, and insert it into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And once the stone is removed, make sure it does not return.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small stone into smaller pieces within the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that specific area with your hand, and expel the stone outside from the place where you extracted it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above, and with their other hand to hold the skin around the opening where the extraction is done, keeping it tight.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a knife into the incision from which this hernia proceeds:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It splits in the space between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle of the leg, first on the left side; and the incision is made over that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cut is wide and the internal narrow according to the amount that the stone projects from the buttock, as much as possible, but not excessively, for the saying is that when the incision is made in the buttock, one must consider the position of the stone, and this should be avoided at all costs.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is a stone with angles and edges, making its extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it resembles a pearl, round and is of the lightest consistency.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it cannot be done in this way, then cover your fingers over that part, or tighten it with a gesture appropriately, the extremity of which is as sharp as a lime, with which you tighten it onto the stone, and do not slip from it; or insert between them a delicate instrument with a curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see a flow of pus, cut it off strongly with vitriolic treacle.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your finger into the mouth of the bladder and cut into it; then insert a smaller one; and in this way, they seem to be divided into two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very great, it is ignorance to cut into that great section, as it causes harm to the patient due to one of two reasons: either it stops (the flow) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, which is why the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If an expulsion of the contents inside that is not natural occurs, or a fracture of the bone uses forceps to extract those in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and water, over it to promote the release of pus.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not disturb the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is loosened, wet the place with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of fine and coarse salves until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of an abscess, cauterization and drainage are performed, and it resembles as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and because of this, urination is hindered (and this is known as the egress of urine), then insert what I said about the plague and extract that pus, for it can cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder and itself.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to all kinds of things that are beneficial for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the hours of healing, make sure that you attend to both parts and adjust the medications that are placed on the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, lodged there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with something that you have previously recommended before it leads to amputation, as troops used for this treatment are accused of causing amputation; and already you have squeezed it and it is such that you take a steel probe, from which this has the form.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of the triangular end, sharp, lodged in the wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take a thread, tie it to the urethra, leaving the stone behind so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the steel into the urethra, piercing with ease until the probe reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, piercing until you have made an opening from the other side; for urination will soon be restored.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand upon that which is broken off from the stone of the kidney, outside the bladder, for it is squeezed and discharged through urine, and the disease is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason due to the patient's condition, then tie a thread around the kidney and another thread on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close the bladder around that stone in this opening between two passages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the adhesion and clean the infected gangrene, which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the kidney again, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other ligament on top is removed when the thread is loosened, for when the kidney stone is discharged, the infection returns to its place and afflicts the patient again.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this it is necessary when you tie the patient's legs, that you raise the knee to their sides, or that you return them to their proper position, and correct the deformity as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in any of those areas, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden by numerous methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their weaknesses is that women who are very strong may be vulnerable.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second weakness is that you may not find a woman who knows how to discover a stone if she has never been examined by a doctor, or if she is married to a man who lacks medical knowledge.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third sentence translates to: "Cleanliness is why you don't allow women to perform this art, especially the operation with their hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth sentence states: "And in women, the place of incision over the stone is far from the actual stone, so it requires a deeper incision, and that is where fear lies.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do this, then ensure you seek the help of a knowledgeable female doctor, as they are hard to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking in this regard, then seek out a skilled and subtle doctor, or present a woman midwife well-versed in women's matters, or a woman who has herself undergone this procedure.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So, present this woman, and command her to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone to its removal. This is because it is important to consider if the woman is a virgin, ensuring she keeps her statement confidential when inserting her finger into the patient's anus and examining the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, cut it off, leaving its root, and then command him to incise upon it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and feel over the bladder, for she places her left hand on the vesica and grasps it firmly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, cut gradually, moving from the horror of the bladder to the exits, at the top of its power, so that it prevails over that matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision over that position of the bladder at the top of the thigh, stopping from some part, centering the urine on that side, and the finger should not be withdrawn from the urine while cutting.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be slight at the beginning; then insert the ray over that incision, and if the urine is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity, knowing how much urine will be released from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the spices of the pear are diverse: for some are small and sharp, others large and harsh, some long and round, and they have spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know the number of spices it contains according to what you have said about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vitriol trichate to the site and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the pear is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments that are mentioned in the removal of pear in men, so that you will be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the vein that is incised, then place powder on the site, open it with a pulley and stricture gently, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not extract it, for otherwise the illness will worsen.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then apply the remedy.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided after a few days, and the location is suitable, then you return to your operation while the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On section regarding hernia surgery.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white cavity, which leaves the genitals of the contents, and it is called the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural lining that prepares itself for the passage of the houl, as long as it is a new houl; and this is the closure of the genitals between the white cavity that we have mentioned, and it is not this but a tartar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, as this material is discharged into them, and sometimes it occurs due to impact made on the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it declines to citron or sanguine, or red, or black and sticky, or white and watery, and it is this that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white flesh that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining slightly in length, with a figure like an egg, and the muscle appears, because the humidity covers all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own fat layer, then the swelling becomes round and separated from the muscle, and thus one thinks it is another muscle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if moisture is between the bones of the spine and the white scalp, then scrape away the feeling.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the colour of the moisture, you should observe the colour of the moisture in the aperture through which the abnormal growth emerges; and according to what is seen in the traces left by the growth, judge what lies within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of a hernia, you should know that the patient must be made to lie down if it is possible, and then turn the organs inside it over.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lay the patient on their back for some time, due to any cause, and cover them with warm blankets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and order the assistant to follow the right side, extending their finger from two fingers' breadth below the spine to the base of the spine and to the opening of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then carefully take a broad knife and cut through the cord of the testicles along their length near the scrotum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to the same distance from the line where you have shaven the skin of the testicles, reaching down to the white bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And extract it, observe, and be careful not to pierce; your incision should be as wide as necessary, and examine the extraction carefully according to the amount you can achieve.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then carefully pierce the white bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the white bone apart; do not touch the cord attached to the testicles, and incise the white bone in that manner as best you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise it completely through, focusing particularly on its thin edges, because if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is a sure risk that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if during the process of removing that from its container at the time of your operation, you have completed the section of the circumcision, then return inside it, and properly adjust both lips of the container from the genitals with stitches, and take care of it just as you do with other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another disease, then tie the vessels that are above the suspension, extract it, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water is added in two instances, then you know that both are hernias; so incise that part according to what you have done with the other in contrast; and if it appears to be an operation to you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then, you shall wash the wound, and enter the sections with wool soaked in oil or olive oil; place outside another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the two genitals and the wonder of the belly; lay it upon folded sheets and powders, and bind those with a lint as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then, take two sheets of cloth and stuff them with woolen rags as follows; secure the extremities with tape or damp wool, and add structure in the crotch area of the pants, taking one extremity from the buttocks towards the two, and the second from the opening of the legging, and two other extremities on either side, leaving two unbound for the thighs, and all adjustments are made to fit in the crotch of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with a knife; so you take a delicate cutting cautery and inscribe at that place the seal of the genitals, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white scar tissue containing the fluid becomes exposed, and then you take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that seal, and ignite it until all moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the seal with scissors, cut it with scissors, and burn it gently with a small cautery; slice open that second one as much as you can until you eradicate all of it; be careful so that the fire doesn't touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more safe and further from infection than an amputation. It is better than surgery with a sword.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you difficulty to use a cautery in the time of amputation or in the time of burning, or an infection flows, then cure what opposes you with regard to this, as a treatment that is suitable for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation because of its horror, then perform an incision as you have been instructed; and it is at this point that you must, based on what we have said about signs, certify that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you must address the disease on some raised spot, then pierce the abscess at the lowest point of it with a sharp instrument, and pause the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the opening is wide enough, then let all the water flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area tightly and hold it there until the flow of water stops.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then dress the wound until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is a contradiction to the flow of water at that moment when you perforate it: this is not done unless the white pannus in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, then insert into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water from the drops is extracted, whose form precedes; or apply a small amount to the size of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns and remains there for about four or five months; and when it is added, then pierce it in the same manner as before, because the disease will also spend its days like this.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the operation on this hernia there is great danger of losing life; so I, for my part, recommend its removal and salvation through a better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on those and the spices of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the abscesses originate in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of them, and this is done for several causes: either due to a severe acute inflammation that overflows into the genera, or through impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in it, and it is a grave abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very rare is the lapified abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the compression of the arteries, or by inflammation of those areas where the memory of it has already been perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that what is called inflammation of the joints is due to the dispersion of pus when you press on those parts, and it should not be probed.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What is formed due to vein inflammation should not be dispersed for any reason; you should not probe it with compression on those parts.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this specific case, incision and section are performed, as well as on other tissues; you insert the knife into the openings of the genitals, then extract the white-colored fluid from them, sever the suspenders of the vessels, tie them, and incise the most distant suspender after you have severed that of every part of the testicle.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the testicle is already consolidated in those tissues, then you should extract it and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion within any cause of the fracture, or between what is between the bones, you must loosen all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a natural opening in the adhesion behind the cause of it, you must then cut everything that belongs to it and extract the humors as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with warm oil and vinegar; and then care for it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that occur in the abdomen.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	This is a hernia that has become enclosed by some kind of swelling, similar to the softening of the testicles, and it makes movement, exercise, and walking for the patient difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is for fear of that which precedes its remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I note that they say operation in that second when I perform the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you should stop the illness on a high chair; then dislodge the suspender of the testicles from their sockets; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hand placed between the testicles, which have been proven to be inflamed by the flame; and use those other instruments as needed, extending them to their fullest extent.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then cut with a knife, as it were, the hard substance that has closed the passages of the vessels while they are still uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from every part as we have said about removing the obstructions in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with two threads, fasten it to the first place where the pain occurs, and do the same again at the end of their course.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make incisions at the middle of the affected area in a straight line according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with remedies for other diseases in which you wish to be free from pain, so that the vessels that cause suffering do not remain blocked, as it is not harmful for these reasons.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then remove the testicles or tie them off with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels and become atrophied, or tie them to prevent their growth with these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	**On the treatment of intestinal hernias.**
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending from the openings of the abdominal viscera, allowing the intestines to protrude through the rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either of the abdomen or of an outgrowth (excursion) of it, and these two types occur for various reasons: beating, sudden shock, loud noise, the lifting of some heavy cause, or similar things.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it is accompanied by swelling in both the small and large intestines as the abdomen becomes compressed.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of the illness is when it is caused by a rupture in the bowels, which at the beginning causes violent pain suddenly; and it appears as an abscess different from the usual ones near the knee joint, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the contents of the intestines coming out.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine pushes through a weak spot in the abdominal wall, and this is called an intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by bloating, and sometimes it runs through the abdominal wall gap, and here it gets trapped, and this is where it causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be cautious, as it is important to avoid the wrong herbs in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of operating on that is to command the patient to reduce the hernia with their hand into its cavity if they obey its return, then place yourself between their chest and legs, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the cord that is the cord of the testicles away from them, and cut the cord of the testicles completely through; and fasten in two folds the incised section as you need to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to make, then make sure that from that, a hole will not be left behind.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove those chips which are left below the cord of the testicles, as long as the white hard lump of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your thumb into the space where the testicle is located, between the white hip bone, which is below the scrotum, and between the second hip bone, and free that adhesion behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then take your right hand and grasp the scrotum at the external orifice, extend the white hip bone with your left hand, raise the testicle at the juncture of the section, and command the assistant to spread the testicle open, and you will dissolve the adhesion behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And press with your thumbs where there is no cause of the intestine's entrapment within the white, hard hip bone.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause within it (the intestine), then press on the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a thick, strong thread of eight parts, insert it through the last segment of the hip bone, which is below the scrotum's attachment, which is severed; and cut the extremities protruding from the thread within four parts, and tie them to any shape in the form of a cross; and attach that hip bone, from which we said the scrotum's attachment is separated, firmly with both hands.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then carefully wrap the extremities of the wounds and tie them with a firm bandage so that none of the vessels through which pus might flow can transmit any cause for further infection.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And another bandage should be applied after the first one, three days apart; then these two bandages are to be removed from the genital area, which is left with the cords of the testicles intact in terms of length and size, and all the padding is cut according to the shape, and a hot compress is applied.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the opening left after the cords of the testicles, so that blood and pus can flow out as we have recommended in what we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply a cloth soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the ulcer; and use the bandage we recommended (and sometimes white cauterization with a hot iron, as we said, is applied for fear of pus flow, since such cases often occur) and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case of the patient is prolonged, then water should be poured over him and he should be placed in a position where the water falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the ulcer with other remedies for ulcers until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventose Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates a successful treatment for it other than the use of forceps.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first step is to perform the operation as we have recommended for hernia, which is to close the vessels near the section with ease; and then dry the middle part around the fistula with something that will facilitate its healing, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	**Capitol LXVII**
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, dislocations in the ankles break apart, as we have said, and this excites the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not deny any cause of hernias to the genius; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, a fissure is corrected in the skin until the hernia descends into the skin; this occurs due to the expansion of the skin in the ankle, as we have said, which causes it to become stretched, and then hardened, and the place excites.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is with cautery, as was preceded by the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the disease is cured by cutting it in this manner: for the malady lies between the thighs and close to the anus, then return the opening of the rupture of the aponeuroses to its place according to the extent, in length, according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tighten the white string that is beneath the skin, as soon as it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the ray and place it over the prominent area of the string, and press it against the belly's projection.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then pinch the two prominent points on the end of the string's ray and align them with one another by adjusting the suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then pull out the string's end, without inserting it into the hernial sac or extending the hernia, or any other cause as you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then apply the cure for the disease, and when you cut away the pus, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is healed; for the infection is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better at this location, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testes is softened due to the softening of the tissues surrounding it; thus, care must be taken regarding it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is tasked with the healing of this that the patient be positioned according to their condition, and all the softened cord be removed from the natural cord; and then make two lips adhere to the wound.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at the beginning, using the excess of softened cordage, make three or four stitches and a secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the stitches; and carefully tend to the healing of other ailments within, so that when the flesh heals, the pain disappears.
Capitol .lxix.	**Chapter LXIX**
De castracio.	**On Castration**
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I will recall it in this book for two reasons: the first is so that doctors may understand it when they are asked about its treatment, and the second is because we sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar creatures.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by a surgical incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not appear as a result of the manipulation.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration by incision and section, first ensure you have the animal and with your left hand, press on the cord of its testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then join the suspenders together, and make an incision on each one with a section between them.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then you carefully incise those purulent sores that you have lanced.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause untraveled regarding the cyphac, but rather the subtle cyphac that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this manner of castration, the one that is done by ligature, is better because it leaves no cause for the testes, so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an appearance of a space in the scrotum where the testes should be, resembling a woman's body with breasts; and another where both male and female characteristics are present.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, a flow of urine can be seen from the urethra at the base of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a difference: their clitoris resembles two testes of a man, slightly smaller and located internally, just as the penis of a man has a foreskin and two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is because you must make those tissues tight within which the discharge of that fluid escapes, and then cure it with a treatment for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men, for whom urine is discharged from the base of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the legs is closely tied to natural causes, as it is affected by stress, and its observation is essential; in some cases, it is exaggerated in certain women to the same extent as in men and can even occur during sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, if you have excessive swelling in your legs with your hand or using fingers, then pierce it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with the piercing, especially at the base of the swelling, to prevent the flow of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of that which is under treatment, until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is born hidden within the body, which fills it from inside, and is strongly inflamed outwardly according to the appearance of a worm (and for this reason they also call it "tailed malady"), therefore we must incise it thus as we do with a wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Treatment of High Blood Pressure**
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	High blood pressure is characterized by the constriction of the female womb or the closure of its passageway.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a previous malady, or from flesh that is not properly adjusted, or from subtle and thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made either in the region of the heart, or on the sides of the body, or in the bowels above, or in the lower bowels, and you should forbid all eating and drinking and conception, and strongly forbid menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observation of the menstrual cycle; if the swelling is apparent, it is advised; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it out through your touch or through a mirror.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the swelling is very subtle and is felt on both lips, then you should cut and disrupt it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it should be applied over both soft lips, and then your fingers indicate the pain in both places at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then you should force open both lips until that subtle swelling is broken and the pain is relieved.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it over the area, and apply heat to the site daily so that the incision does not become scarred.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the growth is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad spatula or a blade of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the abscess is due to food, then suspend it in a container and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of pus from these bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted to the patient's albumen.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the swelling from becoming hardened.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer water from the source.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the innate nature of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene that is in the innermost parts should not be opposed with force in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids, tail, and red botch that occur in the vicinity of a woman's vagina.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are perceived as the openings of small veins more than those of the larger ones; and since old hemorrhoids become hardened, they are treated as such.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And already have I discussed in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it says that hemorrhoids and ulcers are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron is not done.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the body where sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be careful to place the woman in a reclined position, and extend her legs with forks, or a rough blanket, and insert those into the cracks.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those parts the flow of salt from a precious stone, in the same way as with cassia and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then gently rub their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of pus persists, then make a incision in decay to drain and remove the abscesses, stones, and similar obstructions.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey, wine, and make a plaster with this over the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess has drained, good; otherwise, make it adhere to two bandages, and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse it in vinegar or in the juice of plantain or in the juice of nettle, wet it with wine and make it adhere to the place; and take care to keep the place clean until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the patient who suffers from this severe illness, take care that you insert this according to your understanding of what I have said in general.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which needs to be cured.
Capitol .lxxiv.	**Chapter LXXIV**
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket during an accident in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various special kinds of abscesses that occur in the head, as well as cracks, ruptures, ulcers, pustules, erythemas, hemorrhages, oedemas, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments and their various types, the signs of those ailments, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary to say in this treatise about gangrene the method you see in the main when it comes to the gangrenes that you treat, and if you want to know the manner in which the operation of cutting it off is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the gangrene in its beginning is acute with percussion and flecma (inflammation) and fever, and sometimes that swelling occurs and if you feel it strongly, do not cut off the affected part, but treat it with something that aids in the maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then know that you must tie the woman down on a bed with two ties; recline her on her back and adjust her feet to the lowest part beneath the belly, expanding her thighs and holding her arms below her body, and attach some to the bed with suitable bindings.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is expanded, the form of which will appear in those cases that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to use this instrument, hold the handle of the main part of the tool close to the woman's body, and whatever part of the instrument enters the woman should not be larger than the diameter of her own neck and treat the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the diameter of the mother's neck, then you should apply poultices over the texture of the mother's neck to prevent any further penetration of instruments into her neck.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should ensure that the angle of the instrument, as it enters from the side, is placed correctly and that the one administering the instrument holds it and rotates the angle until the opening of the mother's neck is fully open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the contraction appears and it is felt with the hand, warm and moist, then you should immediately take a long spatula and clean the head of the mother.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanie (bowel movement) is evacuated, you should place a compress soaked in warm oil or vinegar on the affected area, and hold the pressure in the region of the anus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then remove the compress from the anus and place a clean, wet cloth over the penis, containing lavender.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And the treatment is considered complete after two days, applying whatever remedies are appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then treated with water containing crushed lilies or aristology (a type of plant), and finally, the compress is reapplied.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the infection is deep within the anus, you should abstain from any treatment with fire, and instead, focus on the remedies we have mentioned in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the embryos within should be treated when they deviate from natural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A midwife must recognize the beginning of natural childbirth by certain signs: when she sees a woman struggling in her pains and wishes to breathe freely, and is distracted by what is happening to her during labor, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then know that this labor is according to natural form, and that the emission of the child is upon his head, or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe those signs, know that her stomach is compressed so that the embryo gradually descends as it moves over his head, and he receives the second breath, and is freed from those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Whoever is different from this part is unnatural and not commendable, for when the drunkard's condition has taken hold of his feet and his body lies before his head with his legs up or his hand on his foot or his head and his hand, or his abdomen, and he is strongly twisted on his spine, it resembles a figure that is uncommendable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For just cause, the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those matters, and guard against errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the signs of those, and what cunning is in those for their meaning and their standing upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is located on their head due to natural difficulty, and it is pressing on the woman, and it becomes a difficult task, and sometimes his virtue is already weakened, then that one should stop, or what women have it, and evaporate the heat of him with fennel seed and mint oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then carefully insert the catheters between their dilated and fractured spaces, or rather, through that second opening, or directly into it with your finger until you feel the moisture within it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the baby descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fennel flour mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient, remove the poultice, which should be changed and made to sneez vigorously; and close both his mouth and nose for an hour, so that the baby is expelled as soon as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the baby's feet have been expelled at the beginning, then cover them with something to facilitate their delivery little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her legs up, and then carefully position the mat on the ground; and ensure the woman does not fall due to the movement.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the pains are not relieved and the child dies, then incise them and extract the remains of the fetus from the mother's body or tie the womb to her hand with a cloth and remove that completely, for it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the position of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, you must gently press those below, and gradually turn the small body, and then take one of its legs and stretch those little ones out bit by bit.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If he is situated within the tight spaces, then command him to relax and make him cough up the condition, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if what we have recommended is not forgotten, then gradually return the small effect until it settles into its second natural form, for that will then be forgotten regarding the lighter aspect.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do what we have recommended, then take a mixture of alder and dissolved gum, and pound it all in a mortar with good percussion, and then apply the cone of the woman, the base of the patient's belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then apply that cessation in distilled water, until the humors are achieved.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the openings left in him are closed, then do the suffumigation of myrrh and gently apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the suffumigation for an hour, then stop it over a hot pad, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take away from that, and press the lower part of his belly with light compression, for the effect will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine carefully the condition of their hands and fingers.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition appears in this manner, then you must skillfully insert your fingers one by one; and have the woman bend forward over her pelvis, with her feet down below, and her buttocks resting on the floor, and arrange her hands so that they support her lower back.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the patient's belly, little by little, and extract from their feet whatever remains trapped between their toes, so that they are prepared for the release of the pus.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the condition does not improve, take the patient's feet and move them vigorously, and press gently on the hip joints little by little until the disease can be cured from within.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands and manipulate the condition little by little, and instruct the woman to strain until the condition is completely eliminated.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The condition of the patient hanging laterally depends on one of their limbs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use ingenuity to reduce the patient's hand, but if you cannot do that, then elevate the woman and try again.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if trying does not work, then place the patient on their side, and cut things around them with a violent blow, and then apply medicinal mud and bandages that you have prepared earlier.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has begun, then perform a cesarean section immediately, and then study the reduction of the hand, and gently return the fetus to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, and order her to press herself until it is safe.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The condition of the fetus, with its limbs expanded and the fascia stretched to both sides, is a sign of its large size.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Nurse should hold the baby's hand and gently turn it this way and that, to make it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is heated and inflated, then apply pressure to the hernia where we have recommended oil and bandages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then gently guide the patient to contract and relax their muscles, after which place a hot compress on the affected area and command them to lean to the right, then reverse the order; this should alleviate the condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare for the exit of the foetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you observe the signs of labour from the mother following this pattern, consider and then insert your second finger into your own palm between the joints to ensure it is dry before proceeding.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the object is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, you will cut through that with an instrument, so that it does not get stuck and suffocate.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently pull the object out from within, waiting until it stops moving, and tell the woman to wrap some cloth around herself, and then slowly extract it with ease, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that twins are sometimes born alive, and sometimes not at all, or three or four, which is strange and rarely happens; perhaps the causes are natural, and not human intervention.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And for those cases, whether they are multiples and separated by a thread, distinguish them within the ligament in each child's navel; some children are born this way naturally, and sometimes children are born without sight, as we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if certain things are difficult to deliver due to their position, and you reach the point we have discussed regarding unnatural positions, then treat them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and simplifies delivery, and she takes her time, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body for childbirth, bringing about safety.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder that it forms in the womb from embryos, and they are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they form in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary for you to verify that a woman who has aborted none should not get pregnant again, or otherwise, another could be completely formed, which causes great damage due to the measurement of the wise doctors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this is included in the science of midwifery, which teaches her how to deal with that young woman as if it were this, and therefore she must be very careful about it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On removal of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have discussed in the section on treatment methods, and it is not possible to avoid surgery, then you must consider whether the woman's health is good and she is free from any of the conditions that might lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now you must place the woman in a recumbent position on her side, with her head tilted upward and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The practitioner should hold both parts or place her in a position on the bed to prevent the body's contents from spilling out during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the patient's mouth with fragrant oils and mucus from aloe, fennel, and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife uses her hand with these oils and mucus, easily inserts her hand into the mother, and carefully feels for the place where the cuts are made in the baby.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this regard: consider then if the baby is ready to be delivered headfirst, and place your attention on the cuts in the feet, or neck, or mouth, or roof of the mouth, or leave the beard, or in the crotch, or in places near the ribs, or around the hip joints.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the delivery is to be over the baby's feet, then in the birth canal, or at the midpoint of their ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And he should have the thumb of his right hand raised, curve it at that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, insert his finger with ease and keep the thumb in one of those positions we mentioned, until he reaches the source of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then he should place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, in the same position as the first, ensuring they are equally attracted and do not extend beyond their natural range.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is beneficial at every step, so that the removal of the hernia is facilitated as much as it is done in tooth extractions.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And be aware of what is between them, where the extension is softened; if any part of the hernia is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her fingers coated in oil and insert them skillfully and rotate those parts that are stuck.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the opening of the hernia is overlooked, then the incisions should be changed to another place where there is pus; and do this until all the hernia is removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is positioned away from the other and cannot be reduced due to the tension of the hernia, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and extract it until it is all removed, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	However, if the head of the hernia is large, or it becomes constricted during extraction, or it is located at the top where there is tense fluid, then you should insert between the sharp edges and open the head and extract the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat," which resembles the shape of other instruments in the chapter concerning this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And apparently, the creation of such a splint is a great feat by nature: and now you insert that into the wound or take away that swelling as we have said; then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is fixed and tight, then you must cut through the fork; otherwise, the moisture in the foot will not be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not contradict the observations, then you should insert the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdominal pain is a cramp or related to moisture, then you must perforate that place so that the moisture inside it drains.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the object is in their foot, then its attraction should be light and its direction towards the mother's opening should also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and foot are squeezed, then you must extract that thick cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the abdomen and foot until what is inside flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are stuck and the head is turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the mother's mouth is blocked, then insert the hand in the opening of the womb, seek for the head, and draw it with these threads into the mother's mouth, and then insert one, or two fingers, and pull them towards those parts.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is blocked by an apoplexy that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to disturb it; instead, immediately provide warm, greasy effusions.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages, and continue the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on their side, try to reduce it gently; and administer what we have said about the living condition.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then make an incision in the leg, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause within the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the treatment for the wounds that may occur from the procedure.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs due to the wound, then use strict waters and administer the other treatments.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose belly was swollen with death, and again over that fire another conception has taken place, and the other fetus is dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It has happened that after a long time an abscess has formed in his leg; and as it opens, fire appears, and he begins to shiver with cold.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been frequently called to treat it, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not improved.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should pause and consider some causes of great attraction from outside, and reduce it to a bone, and after a few days, another bone will form, and yet another after some time has passed; and you will be greatly amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you will continue to investigate the disease, and extract some bones from it, following the woman's existing dispositions in her various states, and I have seen it in such a manner for a long time, correcting it with a slight tremor.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And it should not seem strange to you, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the patient, as the doctor with his hand administers treatment gently.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the forceps in which the edges are curved, with two jaws on either end of the handle.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this forceps should be made to be very subtle in its tightness, and it can be done either with ivory or with ebony or bamboo wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each wood should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and the margin on both sides of each wood should be one finger's width, and in the middle part, there should be two adjustments of the same wooden pieces, which are already fixed, with a length equal to half a palm, and the breadth of each piece is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it opens to receive those which you turn over the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form of that subtle and lighter pus.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wooden sticks or bones according to the appearance of tongs.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extreme end of it, two additional parts can also be attached, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and their width is approximately two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, you place the woman on her side over the legs, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand over the instrument using the clamping forceps according to the amount you want from the aperture of the womb until the meter shows that it is enough.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vertigo that the ancients spoke of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that which is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as which the great head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like tweezers to which are attached teeth at the end, also when using them, and sometimes they are made long according to this form, also when using them, which have teeth as well, with which it cuts and contains.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of minimal healing:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Method of unwinding without a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Method of unwinding with no two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of a pair of forceps with teeth that hold onto the head of the child to compress it.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A pair of scissors with two blades, used for cutting through the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A shape of two wide scissors.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments require practice, and when the number of their kinds is multiplied and they are well prepared by the artisans, then they become easier to use and more useful for people in large numbers.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments, for the need for others is not an excuse to disregard these.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second (object or part is unclear without context).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe freely, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, then take a cloth and make a hole in it, placing it over the mother's mouth, with warm and harsh herbs such as mint, rhubarb, chamomile, licorice root, and cassia wood, and also some holy (or perhaps sacred) althaeas.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and then that cloth should be placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a tube made of canvas in the mother's mouth, and ensure that the steam from the herbs goes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one should be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment does not work and it is not excessive, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or in an infusion of althae, and insert that same hand into the vagina and gently seek out the second one, and once found, take it slowly and carefully, according to what we have recommended, so that the mother does not feel any violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then, it should be changed from side to side with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it should be adjusted regarding the amount of attraction, as it will obey and avoid any adhesions.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is restricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with all kinds of herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then be careful not to perform any operation on that in the process of abstraction, but nevertheless understand that what lies between him and the mother's womb is a woman's matter, and baptize it with medicine and tetracyclic; for this will rot it within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is observed that there is a high fever in the head and stomach, which causes the disease, then understand that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menses and afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to make an incision or a cut.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the delicate end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoke should be controlled above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke is consumed, and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unperforated anus in infants.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants have this problem, with their anuses being narrow and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, if the swelling does not go down; otherwise, use a sharp instrument to pierce and be careful not to touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully treat that sore with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of infection, apply heat to the wound for several days, and stop when the child's fever subsides.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that the infection in the anus occurs for the consolidation of a wound or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with water and lead, as we have said regarding treatment and plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that tend to leave (or open).
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that open in the perineum or in the space around the anus tend to produce a small amount of thick pus.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a mass.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is old and corrupt from moist white pus or subtle decay, sometimes these fistulas penetrate from them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are guided by the liquid that issues from them due to discharge and inflammation; and sometimes the disease of discharge uses malady for its exit, and strongly it is issued from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from those fistulas, some are found in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the nut of the testicle.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And for the case where the fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate out, you should insert a thin, pointed object into the anus, and try to gently pull or force on the fistula when there is no resistance.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that area, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the tension or hair in the proper location.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any tension at all or do not notice any cause for the pain, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you should stop treating it.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that area and its prohibition from being used for treatment until the location is medically consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that tension prevails here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the radiating parts; and it festers forever; and it does not respond to treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure for them lies in the diligent and thoughtful work of skilled physicians over which they remain firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	However, in cases that are not penetrating or recent, healing with ferric substances is hoped for according to what you have been advised and what has already been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the patient's affliction is between your legs over their intestines, the legs are raised within them, the parts are inclined towards the patient's abdomen, and then you insert a plug of lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, at the place where you know the tent enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the affliction is around the heart, then you must insert your small finger vertically into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the small finger a sensation as if it were already discovered and the attempt to penetrate is complete, or if you feel something between the thumb and that part, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, because there is no cure in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they may say that it heals certain people at times.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which one hopes to heal them quickly, you make subtle cauterizations according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned above, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh surrounding the fistula, which is similar to a quill of pen ink, has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then attend to those with wrapped bandages until all the flesh that is adjacent is healed, and treat those wounds with medications that nourish and strengthen the flesh, and if it heals well; otherwise, it will not be healed in any time through other treatments.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters, but does not penetrate into the deep tissues, and between that and the attempt, there is a thin layer of flesh or muscle, and the fistula reaches to the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and watch as the attempt dries, and continue this process until the drying of the attempt reaches the place where the tip of the attempt enters, and by the attempt, it is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those infected flesh that resemble a canal of penance and are not opened for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a discharge of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those flesh, then the best thing to do is to use a clean instrument heated by fire or acute medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts both good and bad habits: it is suitable for those attached flesh and cuts off the pus by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat those wrapped in calluses or hardened flesh that cause pain in the affected area, and take care of the infection with hot embers or hard, infected flesh that generates and solidifies a cure.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines consist of sting and excision; when the pain is relieved, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If a fistula has already penetrated into the perineum and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and investigate that area carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you sense a tumor and between you and it there is clearly a soft or fleshy substance, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: first, by cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, by drying it out so that you can return the intestine to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding, without performing a surgical incision since you will not know the extent of the tear containing the intestinal contents, and thus do contrary to the patient's best interests; or third, by carefully curing it as we have said, elongating that tissue, and draining the pus that has formed within it so close to the anus, again as we have mentioned, or by attempting or using another instrument of extreme acuity, and then repairing all the torn flesh in the fistula that is inside the cavity through incision, and if the opening above does not heal properly, and the fistula remains open at the anus, it will become less painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body and at the margin of the anus, take the probe of the perforating extremity, which is thus with a needle prepared to pierce the skin in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert yourself into that wound enveloped in lint or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is penetrant at the margin of the anus very deeply, then you extract the thread from that trap by inserting the tip into the anus; and you extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends, then open each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you more deeply insert the thread into the flesh, open it until those flesh parts are opened between the two ends of the thread and they fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not deep enough, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with forceps or other means, for it is not appropriate for you to do this yourself so as not to hurt; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spade with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is very acute and the other edge is not, so as not to hurt what is unnecessary when you cut.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two types, either they are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are with a mass of grainy fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, the heat flows from them at that time and it is one, it is many, it comes out of them, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are open only in the anus are usually due to a lack of moisture, from which clear or slightly yellow urine or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit down and press until the pain subsides and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then hold on tightly and suspend yourself or have someone hold you, and close your eyes. Then cut open those parts that need it, and reduce the swelling.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the cuts are not held in those parts due to their moisture and softening, then take a rough cloth or a towel or woolen thread, and pull out the threads from the roots, and then cut them and sprinkle some powdered substances over them at the incision, so that they adhere to those places instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the hernia does not obey and comes out, then dissect the malady by making small incisions, wash with water that is in the wound and helps to expel it more easily when the hernia protrudes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is light, and it is because you take those with your fingers, or those with a candle, and make incisions in them, and then attend to them with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for whoever makes the incision, know how to administer sutures according to this method: take a thin thread wrapped around your finger, insert it into the hemorrhoid from above, and pass the other end through the opening of the opposite side beneath the needle, and then wrap the two ends of the thread around the base of the hemorrhoid outside of the needle, and stretch it taut; and close the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, tie the thread tightly, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do it thoroughly, leaving none of them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from that part.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place your weight on the cloth soaked in hot oil or wax; press it onto the wound and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave that inside the wound; and when it heals, apply ointment or other treatment until it is completely cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas may occur due to drying out of an opening or due to constriction from natural causes.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, you will need to open them with a pointed instrument or with your finger, ensuring they remain moist and free from any pus, which prevents their consolidation; then treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should stop those parts from bleeding more violently than the first, which have been cut and are raw; and promptly tend to those that need healing.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernias is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernias are crucial, and if they appear red according to the color of the skin resembling a thumb, they should be treated immediately throughout the body, especially in the areas around the feet and legs, and through these pains you must address them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so it is necessary to incise what is in the area of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its origin; and promptly tend to that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May a verrucous growth be a small, rough, round ulceration on the surface of the body, often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to stretch and incise that, or clean it with a sharp tool inside the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or acute medicine, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they (the growths or conditions) are eradicated with the tool that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a tick (formica) be a small, hardened or fistulated growth on the body's surface that itches and, when pressed, feels like a ant bite, appearing around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a needle of goose or wolf feather, strong and sharp, and press it onto the swelling within the circle of the swelling, and then twist your hand around the needle until you have pierced what lies within the circuit of the swelling, and place it into the depth of the flesh, and uproot the swelling from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The removal of the needle should be subtle, gentle (not perforating), wrapped around itself so that when it is lifted from the swelling, the pressure on it is alleviated and its rotation is controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as mentioned above in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes heat is applied with silver or bronze or iron that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those used in the treatment of small children, which are small, and of those whose anus are tender or painful, the heat from such instruments should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few heat applications:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the tube above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished where the bag is tied as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it inserted into the anus should be blunt (not pointed), tailored to subtlety; and on one side of its length there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the thickness of the rays and more narrow a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be filled with medicines from a bladder of an animal or sheep's skin, and its opening be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be punctured with many things as it revolves; and if the space between the parts is the thickness of that thing.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those parts strong, raw silk from ten threads, or surround them; adjust the bag to those parts; and when the bag is placed there, it should be tightly wrapped around the patient's thigh between two strong bands, and tie each part: The quality of tying those parts is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should be laid on their back, raising their legs and placing a cushion underneath them where the pain is located, or a lance; and apply the pointed cautery with oil or egg albumen or a paste of fenugreek or similar. Then insert it into the anus easily, and let the minister take the bag and squeeze it two times, vigorously, so that everything in the bag is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the bag and the patient should raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with that for an entire night, it will be more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that applying heat to the pain of intestinal solutions and vomiting eases it, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or festerings, then use a gentle heat and cautery, for the cauteries of which children are made to suffer.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the cure for plague what is suitable for the body, and you have thus given the cure for those with great pain and according to the abundance of medicines.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place where the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are also due to the heat of fire, or an incision of space or of skin, or a blow with a lance, or a whip, or an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on sudden deaths.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Plagues that are in the parts of the body can also be like a plague that strikes the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is very important to recommend the cure for some plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate concerning other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it says that when a simple plague occurs on the head without fracture, consider: if it is due to a blow or something similar, and the patient has already bitten their tongue deeply and it is a severe plague with the risk of apostema, then you should immediately perform a cerebral fleebotomy and extract the clot from the sinus according to the amount of virtue (or consistency) of the clot, unless any other cause prohibits the fleebotomy, especially if the clot that has formed from the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the fleebotomy should be performed on the opposite side of the affected plague; and attention should be paid to the patient's rest, diet, and avoiding heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If any cause prohibits the use of fleebotomy, then the diet should be restricted and one should avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the plague, if it develops into cautious apostema, apply hot oil or wine with astringent properties to it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the presence of an abscess, apply pressure to the sore spot, if it is recent and its pus has not yet changed the color or consistency that I will describe below, then press gently.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, apply hot compresses until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or due to a rupture of space and similarity, and the edges of it are not suitable for closing by means of ties, then close them with stitches as I will describe regarding their stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the sore has already exposed bone and penis, and it is not an enclosure but a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the place of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are coarse: caps, grains, and similar things, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all of it and remove it, and then care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues are an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not drained by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should incisively cut it or tie it; and if cauterization is necessary to prevent the pus from discharging, do so until the pus is drained.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it solidifies in front of the air changing those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil from crushed herbs, dragon's blood from two parts, and unextinct caus from three parts; mix all thoroughly and grind it fine, and with this fill the plague, and constrain it tightly so that it adheres well to the affected area, and coagulate it with pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it over the poultice and leave it, without loosening it while it is in that state, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times, it is treated only with cautery, when there is no acute pain or inflammation.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is also performed on large hernias when it is deemed necessary to pause them and tighten them, and they are recent hernias with fresh inflammation, where the air has not yet altered them.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then one cannot understand the position of this poultice, but rather treat them as we have said, either by tightening over the blisters with a paste made from wheat flour and water and honey until they get a crust, or treat them with other remedies as they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in the bone of a small plague, then you extract it by gesture.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you should say the cure for skull fractures, which are deadly.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plague of the colon.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the colon, then it is not different in treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the colon are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no need for immediate treatment, but rather to avoid the cure from causing intense pain, as well as applying and binding something that acts like vitriol and similar substances to prevent damage to the nerves and tighten them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity leads to the brain, which is the source of all members' functions.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with lighter medicines, then it is washed with water twice, sometimes dipped in rose or non-rose oil, and rubbed when washed with water, and other remedies are applied afterward according to this method, and moistened with humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is severe, then stitches are administered, or the openings of it are tightened, and afterward, care is taken with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the pain is deep or an abscess occurs in it due to a severe break, then it should be pierced at the most vulnerable spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the plague an artery is already incised and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine is already incised from the throat down, and the veins of the collar are saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the throat and do not touch that; first equalize it and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it decently, leave it for a few days, and care for it with ointment in which there is stiffness and excitement until healing occurs.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of decay within it, extract as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for you, until the plague has subsided, and separate it and remove it from the body.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the illness is recent, sprinkle on that powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the illness a fistula is detected, then treat it with that thing whose memory will come appropriately in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the ailments of the collarbone or similar, when it is painful between the shoulders, it is treated with a space or a splint or an armband or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the lance or the splint, and it feels deep, then consider more if the illness has an outlet when the patient's condition worsens; then you will know that the illness is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the illness is recent with its pain, then you should apply to it from the first hour powder, and do not tighten that so that the pain is not held deep within and returns to the heart and worsens the patient's condition; rather, apply to it a soothing ointment, and untie those two times per day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, you should apply a hot compress to the affected area to draw out what it holds from moisture; and make the patient rest on the sore spot so that what is within it flows out properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If after three days the sore is healed and no symptoms of spasms, palpitations of the heart, or stiffness in the joints occur, and other good dispositions return to the patient, then you know that the sickness is cured; and afterward, treat those who still have pain with hot and cold applications until they are healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is accelerated and remains open for a long time, then you know that a fistula has formed; so treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the sore is due to a cut or wound in the joint or muscle, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with the method mentioned above for binding, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If a skill has already been gained in the bone and they have already made incisions into it, then you twist the pain and cut to extract those bones, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the bones are not separated, leave them inside so that the pain subsides, as extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other pains that occur in other members, the treatment during healing is similar to what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal pains.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great, some visible protrusions may be seen in the intestine or intestinal nerves, so that their intrusion and suturing require both strength and delicacy.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And when a small disruption is caused, it is difficult to be rectified by other means, and I know that the reduction of them is much more difficult if you do not take care of their reinsertion into their place immediately, for they open and thicken, making it difficult to insert them.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is to move it slightly, for in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in both aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the stitching of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two stitches are common and most suitable for stitching other parts of the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two stitches communicate with other parts, but nevertheless, they are more suitable for the stitching of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you, exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it is said that when the hernia is small and there is no visible cause from within the abdomen, and it is difficult to reduce, then it presents in one of two ways: either due to the fragility of the rupture as we have said, or when the hernia experiences inflammation because of the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is in this condition, you should wrap it with a cloth soaked in lukewarm water, or use water containing vinegar, sage, and spices, and apply this to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, they use wine, which has a drying effect, and it is better than just water for resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, once you have resolved the inflammation, you should moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of salt and mallows, for this will gently expel the contents from it due to its mild effect.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Maybe if the insertion of this treatment is excused, then you split the disruption with a small, smooth instrument which incises hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate to avoid cutting, and there is no need to secate or drain.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp knife, and another part of the blunt knife, with a fine tip, but not too sharp, should be preferred over a spatula.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the disease is aggravated and the intestine has protruded, it should be reduced according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over it, as it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it occurs in the upper part of the belly, then you must elevate the patient's head and feet above the openings.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must stop your intention and all consideration in that place so that the opening where the pain is is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And also, you must manage this in great pains and in small pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small pains, apply what you have prepared, and then make the minister be between your fingers, who has the whole disruption in his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then gradually uncover from one to another until any cause of the suture is discovered elsewhere.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then place it near the extremity of the tear in the ring finger, and tighten the needle, so that you do not push through both ends of the cord, but rather push it through the gap left inside, until you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the phalanx, and thus you make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases, join both parts together, and add the two lips and the wound through proper addition; then reduce the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into that one, and attach it to the thread as if it were the first needle; do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, from coarse to fine, as the thin needles penetrate the flesh slightly, while the thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord; therefore, it is necessary that they be both coarse and fine in thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And ensure that the needle is inserted into both ends of the affected leg gently, so as not to sever the flesh excessively and allow the disease to heal before its solidification.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the stitches, so that the disease is not hindered from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then cut the ends of the needles to prevent them from damaging the patient further during their sleep; and place a padding over the stitches, made from anything suitable, which covers the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the disease has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles are most convenient for small wounds, as they suffice with just one needle or two, or even around those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second type of stitch is as follows: you administer a single stitch to all four ends (of the leg and two ends of the hip), at once, using a needle with thread meticulously and appropriately wrapped around it in terms of fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have inserted the needle through these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that split middle part from which it began, so that the thread retracts the pus-filled gap from the wound, so that the suture is as secure as a drape with which the drapes are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each suture, leave the thickness of your little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture heals men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this type of suture, I have treated a wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was infected by a knife, and it was a rupture of the wound measuring about a palm, and there were disruptions around two palms from the abdominal wound, and then I reduced that part where the abdomen had been wounded for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague, once consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, is cured and considered healed; and it may recur for many years, and is converted into its conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other physicians had judged that it was not healed; but by a miracle of fire, for the pain did not cease when he applied ointment, since it was in a place where neither salves nor any medicine could penetrate, he continued to apply heat to the plague twice a day and frequently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two kinds of stitching according to the narration of the word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And indeed, you begin the stitching of the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, when the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the middle according to the right and length of the body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; then make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside through the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made it penetrate, you will make it penetrate another time in that middle part of the wound outward to the wound inward; and leave the extremity of the flap that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate the other extremity of the wound inward to the wound outward.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make a new penetration with the same penetration that you use to penetrate the flap at the extremity of the wound, so that everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin at this side of the wound and cut through that extremity that is at the other side of the flap, remove the needle from the thread it was penetrated with, return it to the thread and attach the extremity of the flap on the other side of this wound's edge; and remove the thread that belongs to the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this a few times and then do it again, continuing in this way until you have closed everything that is outward according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of stitching is that you sew with a needle to which the hair is attached, sewing the skin, so you stitch the wound once from the end of the tendon, and then again until it is completely closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of stitching, which is peculiarly Italian, and highly recommended for healing, is that you sew with a second-quality thread that some doctors use, adding to the whole a part corresponding to its natural state; then apply one end of it to one extreme of the wound and the other end to the opposite extreme, and this is done according to your discretion.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should keep the needle at the end of the wound facing towards you on your side, and make it penetrate the skin from inside out, passing through both ends of the wound; then turn around the needle and make it penetrate from outside in, going through both ends of the wound again.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then carefully turn those edges, causing some of the separated parts to penetrate from within to without at the two extremities of the mirror other than the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than the common light sewing, and it is the suture of which we have previously spoken.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they might say, "The suture of the belly is corrected with two needles; you insert a thread into some of them, and begin the intrusion of this needle from which it is your duty, and make that penetrate within the other side according to the suture of those by which the bodies are joined together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment of one disease should be judged according to other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is that when you perceive the recent disease having a foul smell in front of its wound that the air alters it, and return the intestine to its cavity and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the disease, then place your hand over that ash which is ignited at your presence so that it burns hard and extracts the pus, and becomes hardened and healed; and treat that wound thus as with other diseases until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have medications at hand, then apply this treatment as soon as possible when it begins to get hot, cut off the affected part, and change it every two days, just as you have been taught, until it heals, for you should not need other treatments in complex arrangements when the diseases are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to the vital parts of the body, then immerse a lion's share in a bath of good quality oil or oil that has been heated, and place it on the circumference of the places that lie between the angles and leave the axillae.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, which symptoms you often see, then fasten a black, stagnating vein-cleansing herb to it, especially if the inflammation has been caused by something that has entered the hernia's cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the large hernia has a lighter chance of healing than the one in the subtle hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And its healing is difficult because the hernia, which is called "gegunu," does not receive healing from any plague that enters it; this is due to the great number of veins in it, and the magnitude of them, and the subtlety of the body of that place, and the nearness of that to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the illness is the fabric, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your recipe by which you reduce hernias in general.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been left in the space and it is already turned red or black, then tighten the bandage over the affected area to promote blood flow, as there are veins and arteries within the fabric.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut what is another kind of bandage, place two ends of the bandage on either side of the affected area, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it shall be removed and the fabric's contraction and emission of the plague's arm shall cease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so that you may see someone who was previously plagued with pain in their belly due to a lance's impact, and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, an old plague with a fistula, and requiring management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the treatment for them even if they do not seem to be healing well, rather continue to apply that which brings heat to the affected area and consolidates it.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you see the affected area has consolidated, then focus on the illness that engenders these accidents in the stomach of the patient; do not apply any further treatment to this malady and do not cause any more harm by forcing him to eat or drink against his will, and instead immerse him in a bath and exercise him according to his condition.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And certain experienced ones say that when this plague affects the intestine and is small, it should be tied according to this manner: take some large needles; adjust both edges of the affected area and place a needle from those used in the mouth over both edges of the affected area; so when he presses down on them and tightens his mouth, cut off the cap, for it sticks and will not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then apply another poultice near the first one, and do not stop making poultices until all the pain has gone away.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return that part and with it the pain; and untie those appendages around the hernia until the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is also possible that the hernia appears as a thin thread taken from the hernia of an animal, finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernia threads, entirely bare, and draw the end of the thread through the needle, wrap it around, and insert this thread into the hernia, bringing it back to its rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with poultices is simply a matter of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle cavities, then it requires a delicate treatment, and not every cure works for it entirely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every plague and abscess, as it ages and hardens, becomes an ulcer, and if it is not healed and discharged, it lasts for a long time and is called a fistula in any part of the body, which we commonly call 'ulcer'.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistulas, in truth, are formed by hardened, white tissue, which is painless and has a hollow space similar to the cavity created by pain; for this reason, they are called 'ulcers', that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In some ulcers, the tissue is moist, which causes pain, and after a while, the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this humidity is moist, and in others it is dry, and thick, and thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already mentioned this in the previous division when you described the plagues: that every ulcer which does not heal or fester is due to one of these causes: either because of a lack of circulation of blood in the body; or because of bad humor; or because, between it and the skin, there is hard, forbidden tissue of flesh; or because it is too moist; or because the matter within it is rotten and the substance around it is of poor quality; or because the remedy for it is unsuitable in treatment; or when corruption takes hold in a region, and there is pestilence; or due to the nature of the region itself, as is often the case in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and healing from abscesses is slow by natural means; or because there are one or many bones involved.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already described all of those causes and the signs of them, as well as treatment with medicine in the previous division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so it is that you must know how to treat the fistula made through surgical incision by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that penetrate large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skin, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints formed by the union of the hand and foot, or similar places.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas, those following this manner are of the most difficult to heal diseases, and do not accept treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is any of these fistulas with such depth that it does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to know it, then attempt to clean or cut it, and if the fistula follows the right path, examine it closely.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, examine it with a delicate probe, for the weight of his body's elevation should alleviate and correct the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely horrible appearance, it is not appropriate to attempt any treatment on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then, you should sterilize the horrendous openings, for the humidity through which you cleanse it should also affect the other openings and heal them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you should inquire very carefully, according to which way it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or close, or if it's a fistula with only extremely horrible appearance and located over all the extent of your strength, with all your knowledge and questioning about the illness, and the relief from pain due to your compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes in relation to the ulcer.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will see the cure according to your judgment: for you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close by or in a distant place, near a joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in one of the places that are under your care and which you know.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you examine the fistula according to the description given of its location, remove what is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh, or from hair and similar things, and cure it as soon as it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to the right method, then you must incise it in the place as far as possible, and clean it of all corrupt flesh; and then cover it with certain bandages soaked in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula that you have comprehended with the ferrule.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this as some observations show that sharp medicine corrodes everything that is fragile in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore those that apply ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to be certain about this, then you examine it and dry it as we have recommended; however, do not neglect any cause from veins or nerves or from major limbs, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackness, then you clean it until the corruption is entirely removed; and then apply care to it as the flesh heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the disease does not respond and heal as it should, then you will know that you have not achieved complete eradication of the corruption; so then uncover it again, carefully and accurately perform the reason for it and the purification from it with the last strength you have, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep, remote part of the body, which has not been reached, and so for you there is nothing left but to cleanse that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small and within your reach, then you can remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all these, and from none of them leave any cause for your weakness.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of discomfort arises from moisture, and in their dissection there is no fear or error, then incise these ligaments or flesh if they are here, and dissolve the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hands over the area where the pain is most intense, and leave it there until the pain subsides, ensuring that the pain does not spread to nearby bones or tissues, and be careful that the incision you have made in your operation does not become infected.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Previously, if you are afraid, place a cloth soaked in hot oil or Egyptian water or any of the green oils on the area, for when these ligaments are separated and the bones are removed from their attachment, this attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh or similar, and what is corrupt from it is only the outer part, then carefully cut away this corrupted portion only until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the area.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part that is corrupt is a significant portion, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close and completely cut out that area where the corruption has set in, and once it is healed, treat it.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to hold that in place, serving as an example and assistant to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and among the symptoms inside are signs of inflammation within the body until the material reaches the thigh, and it is material related to abscesses or great abscesses, and do not focus on external causes for him.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time extends for this condition due to errors of the doctors as the abscess grows larger, and it attracts mobile materials, and its treatment is delayed until the thigh becomes fistulated, causing horrific wounds that result in decay and body humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus, after a multitude of physicians spent two years treating it without focusing on the cause but rather on the symptoms, you were called in.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hernia and the fluid that was running from it through the large opening; the condition of that man was completely stabilized, and his skin had a citron-like color.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And thus, you inserted the probe into one of those openings and reached the bone with the probe.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then, you examined all the openings and discovered the cause of their condition from every part of the hernia.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And thus, I carefully examined and incised one of those openings until I discovered a bone fragment, which I found corrupted, hardened, and degenerated; the hernia was already penetrated and corrupted by an impure substance within the mesentery.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then secure what I have uncovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I thought it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already washed it away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I interrupted the restoration of the plague with consolative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I repeated the uncovering over the bone secondarily according to the initial discovery, and found continued corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I secured what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I had made an incision to heal it and restore it, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncovered it again and did not incise the bone little by little particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and that one was extracted from its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no further repetition in the operation of cutting it is necessary unless for the arrangement of its fragility and the lack of his tolerance, and fear of his death, as he suffers at all times due to the superfluity of evacuation, a bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is achieved through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its arrangement within his body is good and restores his virtue; it adjusts to its dispositions and does not cause him opposition in walking or harm for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in the body, then you must act as follows: take lint and tightly wrap it around the end of that prominent bone, and ask someone to extend that limb; then apply a thicker lint over the first one, and close it onto the flesh left uncovered, extending the end of it so that you can uncover the flesh where you want to make an incision, without damaging the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a fence or table beneath the bone, for when you do this, the saw that cuts through the rotten flesh is not hindered.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be careful with the cutting at the corrupted place little by little, for if the corruption is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear on its outer surface, it may require another cut.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it often continues in one piece or in parts, and the corruption may be at the middle or in a part of it; then you must remove all the flesh from all sides; and place a fence beneath, and make a saw cut on the first part where the corruption begins until the cut through the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the cut according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in a joint, cut through that corrupt joint, and close the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but must be treated ingeniously.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption how it appears to you, and burn that, and remove that according to some disposition possible to you, and in such a way ingeniously rectify it so that no vein or nerve is harmed.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels are suitable for cutting these bones, depending on the position of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, hardness, and rarity; so it is necessary that you prepare a suitable instrument for every kind of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation signifies to you regarding the type of instrument of which you are in need; since you have great study and long experience of the methods of this art, and testimony of ways of illness, when you have already seen for yourself what is appropriate for it among instruments for all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will hold with examples as you process to perfect your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the form of a starred key, and its points are in the form of pointed spikes.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable to squeeze the heads of the joints unless they are corrupted or the mouth is widely open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger razor compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of the other saw, cut with great precision: it should be curved to its fullest extent and the edge of the steel blade sharp, and the handle of the weapon cut downward.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the razor with a concave surface:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another very thin razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another razor with an extremely curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the tools with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another type of cutting tool; this one resembles a blade with a serrated edge, often used for cutting bones in various places:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray that is suitable for reason of him who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and in a way that all the causes we have mentioned of razors and scissors and saws are covered.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremity and of the locking of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be caused either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if the treatment you apply to that corruption does not bring relief, and the corruption persists without any external cause, then you must incise that member within which the malady is confined so that it may heal from death or decay that is causing significant damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it is covered by a hot burn, or you may find the darkness extending as the inflammation spreads to other parts of the body that are connected to it; and thus you must make an incision on that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and percussion of certain venomous sources such as those from a marine scorpion or viper or nettle, and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the tip of the finger, you should incise the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not extend to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you should incise at the base of the finger and not give space to the corruption until it reaches the joint of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you replace that, then incise the arm inside the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and the joint is affected again, then that is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for healing in this case is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when there is corruption in the foot, you incise it inside one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter the toe joint, then you incise the leg inside the toe joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then it offers no cure but dismissal, and leaves the patient to their fate.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament in the area you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the place; and extend the instrument one ligament beyond the other, and extend the minister another ligament upon it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without causing a wide gap until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is either cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with cloth from all sides so as not to touch the place itself, and bring the injured patient to a calm and safe state.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the place carefully, or apply some powdery substances to constrict the blood; and then return to your medication until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member with suitable ligaments, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to rise this man from his bed, these circumstances that you and I have agreed upon, which has resulted in a dark mark on his foot due to the adjustment that was akin to the burn of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption, which was initially caused in the deepest part of his foot, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for this condition, knowing that the cure is coming to his member with the violence of his pain and the adjustment of it, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that malady has afflicted him in the big toe as indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it left me, and I felt compelled to reflect on the nature of this condition, as if it were a medicine that rests upon the body; I sought purification for his body, and the excess did not resurface, and they began moving to the other toe where they had started in the foot.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor attempts to cut into the patient's hand, but he does not want to do this hoping for some relief from that excess, and if you must continue the incision of the patient's hand, it is because the virtue of the illness was in its destruction.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has recovered from me, he returned to his land and defeated me by making the man prepare and cut into his hand completely, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this account has not been provided merely to describe this illness, but also to assist those who suffer from it, and to explain its meaning and the way in which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of wounds and the quality of enema therapy with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, then it ruptures and perforates, and the pus flows out of it, leaving the area hollowed out as if from a vessel, and the skin above it remains intact, and is not subject to further destruction, and does not press on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Although if the space is prolonged such that the corruption fully involves a member, then it is called a fistula and not incurable.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is to cut through that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtile and made with thread, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption will not act through any further consequence, and in the cord has passed through the face, then cure it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the wound, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and honey, received in equal parts, and placed in a vessel, then heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the specific quality of good.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then, take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash out the affected sinus with this, tighten the openings of the sinuses, and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then, extract that foreign body; do this for as many days as it takes to clean the sinus and heal the wound.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, the sinus is washed out with water from ashes, when this medicine is not available to you; for you take the ash of an oven, mix it with water, and then use this mixture to wash out the sinus until you feel that the sinus has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash out the sinus with a mixture of honey and water, and also mix in some wine and honey; for honey cleanses and washes, while wine causes the sinus to adhere, especially when there has been an excess of stiffness and dryness from the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which causes flesh to grow there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyphencicon and dissolve that oily crust and apply astringent; or cleanse that part with some medicine mixed with ointments which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the swelling are tight and do not receive the catheter of the clisteri, then gradually widen them with a small iron, and place in it hot water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices seem wide, then you should close them with stitches and leave it with enough quantity so that the clisteri can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the patient from which the arm exits is raised above its usual position, dry that part at the base where it is located in the patient so that the arm runs between them, for when the arm is constrained in the depth of the sinew, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinew within the bone joint at the base as you wish, then pierce and prepare the member so that the arm can run from it lightly according to what you have prepared, without any cause for retention of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied to the sinew, appropriately choosing those over cloth from them.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a quantity that it covers all the sinew; then, cut with scissors along the right side of the orifice of the sinew, making a slit somewhat wider than the orifice; and extend over another piece of cloth the size of the wound according to the amount of the cut, placing it over that for a distant position from the orifice of the sinew so that the exit of the arm from the patient is prevented and the cloth is not too large but rather changed every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is above the sinus opening, whom you massage at all times to prevent what is tight in it from dislocating from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that has collected over the sinus opening has adhered, or formed a strong adhesion, on certain days, remove it gently, and on the third day, when you dislodge the affliction, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Make a small opening in the sinus, if it is infected with a subtle virus; do not be anxious about the adhesion of it, for healing itself belongs to it, for some people take a long time for new flesh to form in their wounds, and others have the opposite effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinew a hard and indigest bract has separated over time, you will know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is prolonged, then adjust in the drying of medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like with a healing unguent when there is too much superfluity added for protection.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last method, by which it is cured, is to take a healing unguent and dissolve it in warm oil, and apply it over it as if it were another substance, and then gently massage it into that area.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to act in the same way when there is no bract, using healing unguent mixed with honey, which should be thick, and apply it; or take myrrh and aloe, mix them, grind them into a powder over fire, wrap that in cloth and press it on the sinew; and use that same honey, which you observed to be thick, grind it into cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And at times, they administer to him long-drawn-out and finely cut lilies of the celestial (i.e., Aloe) plant, and chickpea flour, and centaury, and use these simples either pure or mixed, triturate them and sieve them and sprinkle them over honey which has been refined; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the vein is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the duct of the vein, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you treat it with fistular treatment, as is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers, burnt skin, and added finger incisions, and amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Ulcers are a suppuration that does not heal from the fingernail of the hand or foot, and it strongly affects the other fingers, and as it prolongs without treatment, it becomes either a cauterized ulcer or corrupt, and pus flows within that corrodes the root of the nail, and it strongly corrupts the entire nail, and its corruption reaches the bone within, and an offensive odor emanates from it, and the end of the finger is affected, and its color turns dull.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that which we have mentioned in the division and do not comply with your treatment, then know that you should scrape off all the superfluity that is stuck to the nail and then apply a hot cautery to the wound near it, for cauterization brings relief to such things.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is strong and the nail is healthy, but the additions of the nail already penetrate the flesh, and they begin to pierce and hurt it, then know that you should make a subtle cut at the angle of the painful nail, push it away from the flesh, cut the flesh easily, and apply poultices of medicinal, non-corrosive substances until it is completely healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then know that you should scrape out the bone and extract it, for there is no health where the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe corrosion and destruction in the said area, you will incise it into one of the nuts according to its memory, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is an urgent need for percussion or scraping in the affected area, and if this causes intense pain, then you should begin by applying a flebotomical instrument to the illness, and carefully dry the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across it from above, but be careful not to penetrate the flesh that remains under the nail; otherwise, you will cause the illness to become more painful and give rise to excessive adhesion of the flesh in the area, and thus create an even greater problem. And treat the affected spot accordingly so that the pain subsides.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of many people, is characterized by a large amount of flesh on some and a lot of bones in others, or a significant presence in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate in the formation of joints, or it is their nature to be present in certain nuts of these parts.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born in ignorance of this knowledge will not be harmed, but he who is born with strong joints is more susceptible to harm.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are born with tender flesh, the section is easier, and it is that you insert the blade of a scalpel into their skin gently.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with the condition affecting the joints, treatment is difficult; therefore, be wary of the excision of them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born with such knowledge, be careful to incise the flesh at the beginning roundly into the bone, and then use a suitable saw to close it, and take care that it heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	In the consolidation that occurs between the joints, whether due to frequent use or by nature in a person who lacks this knowledge, or because of a hernia or fire burn, or similar, then be careful to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets, soaked in warm oil, to prevent the joints from becoming stiff, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain areas of the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In the treatment of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins become varicose, which are thick, twisted veins filled with melancholic surplus fluid that appears in most parts of the body's members, most notably in the legs, especially in those who walk, work, and carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and drain the patient's blood from the basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their pain is according to two methods: one is to incise and remove that black blood, and the other method is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, they begin by cutting into the leg with a sharp instrument, while ensuring that the thick blood clot is resolved, which is foul from the leg, and then they firmly grip the patient's thigh at the highest point of pain, below which they make an opening. They cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, raise the black blood clot using the upper part of the incision within the leg, and from above, through the opening between the thighs, until all the desired quantity is removed, as much as needed to alleviate the patient's condition.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then they close that opening, and order the patient to avoid foods that cause black gallstones.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this marks the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the patient should be done in this manner: you who spread the patient's legs, if they are stiff with cold, then immerse them in water and wet the camba (bandage) around their leg with lukewarm water until the veins become prominent; or if due to intense exercise, the member is sore, then rub it with a hot compress.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord at the right of the vein by section, in the middle or at the end, or at the lowest part, you should tie it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then cut the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you should examine the patient, observing if the disease is declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so when you have freed it from the chains, you will see that white thing which is the string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then take your tools and insert the lever into that space which is raised and freed from the chains, and suspend all heavy objects with them.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut, perpendicular to the first, and carefully remove the chains from the vein so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that one and cut it deeply in the rear section, close to the root, and extract it, raising it until it comes out through the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you have removed the one from the highest or most superior section among all of them, ensuring that all are extracted, and then cut it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not succeed in extracting and lifting it, insert a strong double-ended needle, tie it there, and extract it, or leave the hook and turn your hand inside where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it breaks, it is difficult to lift that part, and it comes back to harm the patient through that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once that is completely removed, place your attention on the affected area, immersing it in wine and applying both warm and cold oils, and heal it until it is cured.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without torsion or winding, and it is not in the right position as we have said, you must make an opening on that part of its torsion and at the places where it winds, and then suspend it with cuts until you lift it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to pierce the vein or harm it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it up; and use your prudence in that regard.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury that is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of an incision:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be too sharp with incisions, nor have an excessively acute point, so as not to harm the vein; rather, it should be of considerable flexibility, for if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein because of its thinness; we say this about its superfluous thickness.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs, as it were, in hot regions, just as the hernia occurs in the abdomen of Arabs and in the hindlands and arid lands of India, where there is little moisture or greenery.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And much heat is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the growth of the hernia is a putrefaction that can be seen when snakes, worms, and maggots emerge from within the body, causing destruction between the hernia and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	A sign of the impending arrival of the hernia is when a severe inflammation occurs in the leg, the area becomes swollen, and the vein begins to protrude from the site of this swelling, resembling a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the hernia's edge becomes visible, you must then wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Then take that lead and let it hang suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever the hernia causes any discomfort or pain due to external factors, wrap it in lead and apply pressure to it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, you insert a blade into it and wrap the raw area; do not cut the one that is inflamed within until it has come out, for if you cut the latter, it contracts and enters the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction at the site and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For the pain that requires additional treatment and extraction, it is asked to be removed gradually, until it has come out completely from the back of it, without leaving any cause of its presence in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some people have reported that it is of the length of one's palm and fingers, and I myself have seen it come out from a distance of ten palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the blade into the channel of it and pierce that long channel through the flesh, until everything in the matter has been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the site for some days using medicines; and then care for it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is sometimes seen to have great swelling, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and it causes much horrifying pain, which arises from each painful branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, treat that thus as we have said in the division and refer to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine inflammation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine fever in some countries because it causes great pain and debilitation throughout the body, pushing and weakening the limbs until the tendon ruptures and it is expelled.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of this disease is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms and snakes and roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by the evil of the hernia, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it penetrates through the blood vessel and breaks up the blood, and this must be treated with care.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure and extract it, it should not be done unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then you must grasp what is above it and what remains below it tightly, and then apply pressure over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not disturb you, then apply a hot cautery over the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of the hernia which also corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it has reached the head near the blood vessel, then tighten the upper eyelid with strong pressure, and apply pressure over it, and extract it; and take care that the patient undergoes purification of their body with medicines that evacuate corrupt, bad humors, and be cautious of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the incision above the disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nefri in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I recommended.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You have been called to a village for a female patient, and upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist. After breaking it open, as one does when looking at pus, you saw that it was filled with living-looking white material as it oozed from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then all the pain from that place subsided and you felt it in the muscle, then you compressed it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct the other side until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I realized that I had to turn myself over in the bed, according to what I had seen; and it was too wonderful of the changes in him and of the speed with which he moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my feet according to that manner; however, I have seen many which cause terrible pain to be changed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen this in the feet like on women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that this was anything but that it is because the woman was old, with thin body and exposed veins, and in this condition appears the sensation of that changed air.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that this retrograde treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with clogged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain, do not appear to give aid as we have said, but strengthen over that place and let it rest slightly and dry out on that area where that air is restricted, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not find it in your shoes, then cure that which causes the body's air to be expelled and that which follows, and bind those made with foul pills and serpents and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and according to the parts of the body in which they are caught, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, and small, and concave, and dull ones; others have three angles, and some have tongues; and yet others have barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it is divided into two manners: for the primary members, such as the head, heart, lungs, spleen, ribs, bladder, and their like, when it attacks any of these members and manifests itself by your signs of death, you must know that you should avoid extraction of this arrow from those parts where death is the greatest, and when these ill signs do not appear in you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract that and cure the affliction.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant is when an arrow strikes in it, and passes through the bone, and comes out from the base which is over the brain, due to the violent soda, and scotomias, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of speech, and raging vomiting, and a strong loss of words, and destruction of voice, and comes out from the place of the affliction white humidity resembling powder, and blisters like the consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the arrow enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel a hard impact where it is lodged, not a visible cause; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and the flow of black pus, and there is chilling in the extremities, shortness of breath, and fainting; then know that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus from the plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are infected, and the patient's condition changes, and they gasp for air heavily, and seeks attraction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and there is a great deal of pain with violent sobs, and all the muscles of the body are not at their best.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, one feels strong pain from the eating of undigestible food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear from the wound or the membrane or intestine that has burst, and there is no hope of healing from removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and lets urine escape outside, it causes pain from some internal cause, and strong pain is felt by the patient; then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members (i.e., parts of the body) such as the face, neck, back, shoulders, hips, spine, and leg joints can also be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you understand this in regard to human healing.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that when an arrow pierces the lacrimal duct of a man in the root of his nose, and it is extracted from him on the other side, leaving the grays of his ear unharmed, then he is cured, and there is no harm to his nasal passage.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had embedded itself in his eye, leaving the eyelid below, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of piercing a lion without losing its blade.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no further harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the groin, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one with the sharp point; then I incised through it between two guides, and it was already sunk into the patient's groin; so I became subtle with it, and then extracted it, and the Christian is healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; so, after having passed thirty days without any change in his condition due to the disposition of the humors, I incised through the arrow and put pressure on it, and he was healed, and there was no further harm to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound was deeply entrenched within him, and after setting fire nearby, I removed the arrow at the base of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly, and the wound was deeply entrenched within her, and it did not change in its disposition over time, and the woman did not experience any great discomfort in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man to whom an arrow has struck his face and the wound is deep; he removes the arrow, causing little pain, but many similar marks.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who had been struck in the middle of his nose; it had already inclined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the treatment of him, so that within three days the arrow's entry point would heal.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then he examined the arrow wound very closely; and then he inquired about that subtle attempt, not feeling it; but he felt a sharp pain behind his right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied a plaster to the place with an absorbent and digestive effect, trusting that by doing so, the location of the arrow would appear to him, so that it would dry up over that spot.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be concerned about the place where the arrow has struck; continue applying the plaster to it for several days and no further accidents will occur; and, as the plague hardens, break up the swelling from the extraction of the arrow in intervals of several days until one day you feel the arrow inside its socket and I reconnect it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should apply acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently soothe it, and cut away the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I see the tip of the arrow clearly, and I spend time on this for intervals of time over four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound becomes enlarged, I then try to insert scissors into it and hold them there, without moving, until one day I am able, through clever methods, to pull it out with forceps, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter; and then I restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, and they restore it so that the disease is consolidated, and the malady is healed entirely, without any pain in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows in order to give this rule and meaning regarding what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those in question are not understood from the narration nor do they comprehend those in the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans compare a little about words; and regarding what is present about what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments for the descent of strange causes from the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, you say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are inserted, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or on the contrary side of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is shot through a fleshy part, and then thrown out and discharged.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not observe the time when eating, then know that you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it is healed and the attraction of it and its discharge are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not observe eating at the right time, leave it for some days, then repeat this process daily, and it will be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not observe your diet for some days, then know that you must puncture the path of the arrow at that bone with a delicate journey until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has pierced one of the ventricles of the brain, and it manifests in the patient some of those symptoms which we call, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it there until its presence is no longer felt for a few days; for if the arrow reaches the cerebrospinal fluid, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the cerebrospinal fluid, and the patient recovers after a few days without any of those symptoms occurring, then devise a way to attract the arrow and pull it out.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your efforts to remove it, then administer treatments around the arrow's path as we have recommended, and tend to the site until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body and affects a vital area, then examine that part, and if you feel any movement, apply some suitable stimulants to attract it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here neither nerves nor veins are involved, then make an incision over the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached, which must be removed entirely from the tissue in which they are embedded, using all means at your disposal; and devise a way to do this, if you cannot remove the flesh around the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes possible.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, use a twist of your hand and forceps at all times until it becomes firmly embedded; and with subtlety and great care, so that the arrow is not broken and can be easily removed along with it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it with your own effort, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the path of the arrow subsides, and then try again when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience difficulty due to bleeding, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be vigilant for any incision of veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as you would for yourself and as recommended by others.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you should aim the location of the arrow in it, as this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	For the arrows that are discharged in opposition to another part, or that already process some part from outside, or make the extremity of the arrow thin due to the pressure of the part above it and turn it around, then you should focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps hold it; and throw it away, as it is made light for ejection.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then cut with a knife according to the direction of the arrow, and widen the cut until the arrow comes out.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if this does not help after several days, then repeat the process until it heals.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point of the arrow is in that place, then push it towards the affected area.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point has fallen and you want to give impulsion, then insert your finger into it, if it is hard, press firmly in the concave part towards the head of the arrow, and push it towards the affected area.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the point of impact, as the arrow will be pushed away by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you should compress all the flesh around it, as much as you can, and tend to that area as best as you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close to a surface that you can touch without difficulty, and it is possible for you to remove it, then remove it without delay and beware not to cut into veins or nerves, and pull out the arrow, and treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	A device for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a hook, made of an appropriate material, and equipped with teeth; when they grasp the arrow, the serrated edges prevent it from slipping.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, large and small, according to the thickness of the arrow, the depth of the wound, and the extent of its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	A method to relieve this concave extremity with external pressure so that the arrow's shaft is removed from it and the pain is eased.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method to relieve the sore extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that it pushes out the shaft of the arrow from the concave wound and relieves the pressure.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venipuncture or phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, of which there are numerous ones, are located in the head, specifically in the area around the temples (two pulsatil veins near the ears, known as the temporal arteries), two on each side of the nose (the lacrimal veins, called "aspicient"), a vein in the middle region of the forehead, one at the tip of the nose, two at the nape of the neck, and two on either side of the lips. These are referred to as the "algelic" veins, and there are also two veins located beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, of which one is a cephalic vein and requires the use of wild garlic, and the people call it "the head vein" and "sordid," and it is the median vein composed of a branch of the basilic and another branch of the cephalic; they commonly name it "the vein of the whole body." The basilic vein is the one that is stopped in the domestic armpit and is called "citellar." They commonly call the popular "ventral vein" those situated between the said auricular and the smaller one at the base. And there are two branches to each.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and the leg there are three veins: one of them is left in the curvature of the inner side of the wild garlic; the second is superficial, and its location is left where the domestic legband rests; and the sciatic vein, whose place is left where the wild garlic band rests; and there are other veins similar to these on the band.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are close to the auricles is for cataracts, inflammation, and ulcers of the old evil head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from these should be as you have observed: it is to shave the patient's head and rub the patient's head on the occiput at the location of both veins with ample friction; then tighten the bandage around the patient's neck so that both appear and their locations near the auricles in two places deeply embedded in the head; and seek as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those as they say, here try this.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the scalpel, and it is one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' breadth, or as needed, and make the cut as deep as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, apply strong pressure with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this treatise about the incision and cauterization of these parts.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But regarding the two veins and arteries that are in the thighs, their blockage during phlebotomy is an ancient and serious evil, causing frequent blindness and acute excesses of fluid in the legs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy on these parts depends on your judgment: forcing the patient to contract their muscles until two veins appear by direct perception, and demonstrating the pulse of their legs after the procedure; and then you should be careful.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, raise the cord over the vein as indicated above, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument between them, and elevate the vein; cut it thus as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then, carefully tighten the compression around the patient's condition, place the indicated instrument over the vein for an hour, and apply warmth and pressure to that area until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And having previously recalled them, and made the incision, attract them toward the beginning of the opening.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus, the use of phlebotomy on the vein of the forehead is similar to phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient illnesses of the face, migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the vein puncture depends on what you have learned; it is to tighten the patient's colon with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument called a phlebotomist, which has this shape.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the puncturing at the prominent point of the phlebotomist on that vein and strike it with a lean or other tool in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's body and tighten it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes, the vein is opened with a wide phlebotomy, but it is not known that the phlebotomy of acute extremities is like other phlebotomies, but rather on the lateral extremity, and phlebotomize according to the transversal, because the bone is very close and strong, and the phlebotomy would be damaged in it when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Avoid the jugulation of the two veins that are the tears of two wheels due to the scrape of the wheel by roughness and sebaceous in the wheels, and to the maladies of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the vein in a certain place, and you should then make a phlebotomy there, while standing over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a short distance, for in that place there is little flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then only a small part of it should be cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood flow as much as is necessary, and press upon that area, tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and violent sweating, and for facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it tightens the illness's hold and you should then take the patient's nose in your left hand, take a long, subtle phlebotomy, placing it in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, for the vein does not show itself here, and soon afterward the blood begins to flow.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure you complete the procedure of flebotomy little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then close it for a night, as it is thus restored more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The application of the flebotomy on both sides should lead to the contraction of vessels, the beginning of healing, and the removal of harmful and destructive diseases and ulcers as well as with potent medicines.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the illness tightens itself in each one in their own cavity; and the expert should be over the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then, make small flebotomies on the vein deep in the flesh with an ample flebotomy tool; and remove the blood according to season or as much as necessary for that which you consider needed; and do similarly with another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then tighten the ligature on both veins with a medium-tight grip to prevent the disease from spreading, and leave it within the wrap until the pain is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the surgical incisions made on the veins, it compares to small apothes and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are found on the nose and around the patient's breath.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the surgical incisions for these is that it stops the disease in front of you, tightens the collar around it with a bandage, and then turns the lips inside out, examining each of the two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the proof of each is by the darkness of either, and this happens more often in the area surrounding them because there are small black veins there; and then you make an incision on each with a sharp knife.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt left, and you do not know which one it is, then you begin with the incision of the largest one, and the most obvious pus from among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it look like the two veins that are on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	You may usually cut both veins that are on the lip left open.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	When both veins that are on the tongue are left open, then perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal parts that are in the throat, to the malady of the uvula, and to maladies of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these is that it follows the disease among your fingers in front of the sun, raises the tongue, and observes under the tongue, from one side the vein and from the other side the vein, and the color of each declines towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make a small incision on each one; and be careful not to cut off the arteries with your knife, as they are vital.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins, which are usually fleubotomized in the thigh, are the ones through which blood flows in all humans. The fleubotomy of these is performed in two ways: either by applying a mild cauterization with myrtle or olive oil, or by using a cut-edge fleubotomy tool, which is called a "nessil". This is the form of treatment.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this "nessil" is what you use for cutting, and it comes in various shapes and sizes depending on the width of the veins and the tightness of their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle fleubotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	its width should be adjusted with the thickness of the veins, and it should open the concave, full veins that appear thick, and those containing large clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the technique of olive-shaped flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This flebotomy is of smaller diameter and has more delicate extremities, and it is suitable for the flebotomy of subtle veins that contain thin red blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the use of flebotomy on the basil vein, one of three veins, is to remove blood from the lower limbs and abdomen, which have become stagnant due to illness.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be careful and cautious in that area, because if he deviates and misplaces the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is important that he does not perform that flebotomy with a sharp instrument, but rather with an arteriotome.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the stone does not appear by clear indication, you must know that you should remove it and place another, or seek some ram of it; or incise in the place where it ends in the arm, for it is manifest; and then treat it with flebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform flebotomy, note the tightness of the arm at the point where you touch the location, within which you know the place of the pulse; then place your hand over it tightly; and close the arm, and cut the vein with a concave section as we have said; and be careful not to harm the percussion for any space in the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, with strength the ligament, an inflammation in the place that you have touched with your hand, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the flow of blood in flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the flow is subtile and thin, then know that it is from the artery; and immediately cut and place your finger over it for a long time; and if the flow stops, because the vessel has been severed, tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And you should observe the patient from the moisture of their body, be very careful with them, and do not cause any harm to them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the gangrenous part cannot be severed and you do not have a suitable medicine for it, then you will have to cut into the artery if it appears necessary; for the end of the limb is contracted and the gangrene is detached; or you can use a fistula, make one, take a small portion of it, and stretch that over the place of the vein with stricture using ligatures and poultices within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the gangrene is detached, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned earlier, to the remembrance of the place of the detached powder's flow of gangrene.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the gangrene from him is difficult due to the small size of the location of the plague and the possibility of limb attachment.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is quickly performed to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and the cephalica, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be cautious with the phlebotomist if there is excessive fear in performing the phlebotomy, because then it becomes a nerve; and when he finds the nerve, he must carefully avoid it during the phlebotomy, which will cause stupor, and make healing difficult, and often the patient does not recover fully. This nerve shows itself through sensation; if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not apparent, then you must pause and reconsider performing the phlebotomy with which you are cutting off the vein, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The immediate effect of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws off the blood from the head and provides relief from ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want to perform a vein-puncture with an olive or myrtle flebotome, it is the safest of all veins because it does not harm arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to know that in performing a flebotomy, you must avoid puncturing the top of the vein, seek the most suitable spot, and do not notice it, if it is not enlarged from the initial percussion, which is sometimes necessary before a flebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, it is strongly advised that if a patient has an apoplexy (a condition characterized by sudden and severe symptoms) when not performing a flebotomy at the first percussion, do not pay attention to that apoplexy.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the flebotomy and its accidents are also important considerations which you must take into account for their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translated into English is:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a flebotomy, and on the third or first day after the morning, three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Flebotomy should be administered when it proves beneficial and necessary, either at night or during the day, at any time and in every circumstance.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is advisable that children under twelve years old not undergo flebotomy, nor should women who are pregnant be bled except in the fourth month of their pregnancy, and the elderly, those who have already passed sixty years, should not be subjected to flebotomy.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to undergo flebotomy for some reason, let him purify his bowels with a lion's claw, if there is a great fissure present, so that the veins do not throw off the excess in the flebotomy of the purified bowels, which are clean, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let the patients not be subjected to cruel bloodletting and gluttony, nor do they escape from illness or drunkenness until this is remedied in them, nor from hydroptic ailments, and more than that, phlebotomy should be fearfully avoided during colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplication of farting and burping, and all causes that dissolve vitality, whether it be physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully the subtlety of humors in this regard; if the swelling is due to excessive food and drink, then medications may help if they are at hand.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And it is appropriate to take a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or some exercise for the purpose of making the swelling subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the phlebotomy on the patient's foot at the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And therefore, it is necessary to guard that foot of the patient from all animal misfortunes, such as pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as work and superfluous effort, and heat and things similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his benefit, let the causes be made known of which kind, according to custom, men use herbs for their aroma, fragrance and as balms and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And then follow the flebotomist over a cushion that is pus or the cushion of the one who was to be flebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the patient's arm, and with the flebotomist's hand, press it two or three times; and then tighten the bandage with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the tightness should be tempered, for where the tightness is not equal, or the tightness is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of the sanie; or if it is towards mollification, and then it prohibits the movement of the sanie in the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply compression, ensuring that the area which was suspected to be fluid-filled is rubbed together repeatedly until the veins are inflated and their sensation is revealed.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the flebotomist applies his flebotomy tool with a small amount of ancient oil; he places his left hand's finger on the vein, leaving the spot where the flebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein protrudes slightly and the percussion is reduced; the aim is to target the veins full of gas and, when the flebotomist pauses the flebotomy on those, they contract during the flebotomy and the flebotomist withdraws; if he cuts the vein, it becomes narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for all these reasons, the flebotomist must be stopped and fully focused on these tasks.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after completing the flebotomy, if the vein is swollen in one attempt, it is good; otherwise, repeat this another time, leaving that spot slightly or applying heat to it, if the location is not too sensitive.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the area is inflamed or the pain intensifies, leave it uncovered for a day or two and do not strain the ligament, as this may cause further inflammation or lead to a severe infection, nor immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if bleeding persists, repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the vessel is small and the flow subtle, and you fear that it does not draw out enough blood, repeat the phlebotomy on that part according to its rectitude, and adjust the aperture a little, making it a feast for the spot, because in many cases the spot becomes inflamed due to excessive drawing of blood.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If the area has become inflamed previously, do not repeat phlebotomy there, as it serves no purpose; instead, apply some oil to that part, as it eases the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location than other locations.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that in every flap surgery, the surgeon applies oil to the incision, which is a wise and skilled practice when the flap is taken from one of those areas, as the blood vessel constriction is relaxed and the clot is removed when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a significant abscess is formed at the site of flap surgery, as it often happens due to various accidents, especially when it concerns a small vein or the appearance of blood vessels, then you should compress it and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the area, slightly heating it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And be sure to do this immediately after the clotting of that vein with the help of ice or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or green color appears in the area, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply a mixture of aloe and myrrh, or a solution of mint juice or warm water, or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And sometimes, after repeated accidents, abscesses and bumps appear, requiring phlebotomy of the affected area.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So therefore place your hand over that area, and if you feel hardness there, you should apply compression to it, for that bump is a sign of ill health; and thus be careful not to apply pressure from any of the causes we have mentioned, as strong blood flow can result from a blocked artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area of tightness so that the location is hardened, and then take care of the other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And be aware that you should extract the blood from everyone according to the amount of their strength and according to the color appearing on the skin, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the wound is deep, let it heal until it scabs; and if it seems thick, let it heal until it thins; and if it appears sharp, let it heal until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	For those who are in great pain and require the extraction of a wound all at once, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and the phlebotomies should be lateral.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are feverish, the opposite should be done, and one should extract it in multiple attempts, and the wound should be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best method for phlebotomy of a vein is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of phlebotomy prevents the flow of blood and nerve injury, and is most effective and safe than phlebotomy according to latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed for fainting to occur, you should perform flebotomy, and apply a small piece of cloth soaked in milk or simple mead to the wound; and extract the blood from it in three or four drawings.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a complication of congestion, take a drink before the flebotomy with an infusion of myrrh or honey-based elixir scented with pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar spices, or an aromatic and highly perfumed elixir.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs after flebotomy and it is due to the extraction of a large amount of blood, take a drink of beef blood mixed with slightly fragrant elixir; and apply aromatics such as alyssum, and rest your feet at that point.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here, he wishes to extend his arm and dissolve his gangrened limb a second time, choosing the part from which the flebotomy is performed for rapid evacuation, and the virtue of it is warm, which evacuates the small blood slowly, according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	He who wishes to extend his arm and remove his gangrened limb a second time, and whose body is strong, should do this after approximately seven or nine hours from the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	He who wishes to expel the blood from his body contrary to the direction in which it flows, should have it extended on the second or third day after the first extension.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	He should treat the body in which there is much blood, already cauterized and acute, causing fever; it should be emptied of its blood once, and a large amount taken out, and the perception intensified until syncope occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions for flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the pulse of the body to control the flow of blood, so that death does not occur from syncope, as this should be done repeatedly when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And be careful when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult to extract the blood, press down on it with great force and gently bend it slightly, as this causes too much harm.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habanz the cloth inside where it has become a flebotomiat secondarily; or maintain this with the sharpness of the flebotomy that is coagulated with blood in the orifice of the vein; or place a hot compress on the area of turpeth or sage, and make light compression until the blood has drained out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no other option, you may bleed the patient on that area or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the fistula or basilica when they are not found or are concealed, as it is composed of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the fistula is that the patient inserts their hand into the water until the wound becomes inflamed and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then it is tightened over that weakened ligament with a stricture; and a fistula is made according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or according to width.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be an ample opening, and your fistula should be made such that you make the fistula over the joint of the hand with a small cut.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is blocked, then you insert your hand into the water again and prevent the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in the cold water, and in winter, the body of the sun is most relaxed in cold water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the surgery on this vein is far safer than on all other veins, because it has neither pulsating blood nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the advantage of this phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand strongly or with your other hand, since you have immersed it in cold water, so that the vein becomes inflated and well visible to the eye; then make a transverse incision on it; and if you do not pierce it completely at first attempt, try again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to finish the phlebotomy with your hand, because it contains the nerves of the digit exposed by the skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the sanch flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the sanch will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the sanch is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand on the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not tightly closed; and similarly attend to everything in a straight manner.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of the flebotomy of that with the left hand, it is appropriate for the illnesses of the chest.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the flebotomy of him as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the treatment of the venous vein in the flebotomy is for illnesses that are at the edges of the body, just as there are illnesses of the mother, and to prevent menstruation, and for illnesses of the veins and ulcers of parts and old garments, and similar conditions to those of illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the procedure for a flebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction is applied until the veins become visible; then it is tied over the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein, after being clearly observed, divides into numerous branches on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore the broad vein is cut or the leg is elevated after the patient's position has been adjusted, as this is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a flebotomy on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are left beneath the surface of the skin, and place your hand over it when performing the flebotomy, passing along its length, as if you were going to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And the flebotomy should be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to raise the leg, then immerse the foot in water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist misses on the first attempt, repeat the flebotomy on another small part, since the area is sensitive; and do not fear any harm as long as you protect the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems to be done with the same care on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the same area as we have said is where the foot should be placed, leaving the calf in the wild branch position.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the wound of the flebotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is done with a hot cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flebotomy on him is that the patient relaxes in the bath, and quickly and gently pulls the flesh of his leg from the inside of his ankle to above his foot with a thin, long instrument, so that only this is visible.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, you perform a surgical incision on that part according to each skill that is within your ability and according to the direction, which is best; either make an incision through dissection or sever it through secation, since the location of it is exposed.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is not uncommon; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the sensation of all, perform a surgical incision on one of its branches, and it is that which appears at the back of the foot instead of the aforementioned great toe and little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then tighten the bandage around the incision site and gently hold it in place, as rest is beneficial for healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas are made of horns, or iron, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the treatment of ventozas (blisters) is done through two methods: one involves the incision and extraction of pus, and the other involves the application of a blister.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this blister treatment, which is through incision, is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the blisters that are treated by incision and extraction of pus are in twelve locations on the body: one where blisters are paused, which is at the nape of the neck; two on each side of the spine; blisters under the jaw, below the mouth; two on each shoulder blade; blisters on the loins, just above the tailbone; two on either arm, near the elbow; and blisters on two fingers or toes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of the sancus should not be from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, one does not catch the virtue through them, as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should one cover that the ventozacio is made with fire or heat in any illness caused by swelling until the body is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to provoke a ventozacio (venesection) for illness or continuously, we should do so at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle part of the day and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in men, the sancus (sickness) multiplies in those who are in need of venesection and find it difficult and painful; and from these, one finds swelling and heat on their face and head and neck, and tightness in their face and forehead and darkness and weakness in their eyes; and from these, the place of their venesection leaks; and from these, their laughter increases; and from these, they taste sancus in their mouth, or their tongue becomes attached and spits out sancus; and from these, sleep multiplies, and those who have sancus while sleeping, suffer rigor, ants, and other similar afflictions.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it occurs in any cause of those conditions, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, they command ventilation to be done rather than waiting for two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate relief from ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and what collapses in the ears, it becomes clear that this is an appropriate evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is done at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of foul composition or in which catarrh exists, as it causes great harm to that.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, the use of those vessels is not advisable, especially in the heads where frail conditions exist.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Make known to him who is lying on it that relief is granted; and for this reason you must order the ventilator to place his hand slightly on the parts where the suction cups are, lest there be generation of pain.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The application of suction cups (ventozacio) is instead of phlebotomy of the deep vein and basilic: and for this reason it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the air passages, division of the air muscles, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the suction cup be applied to the alkhel (foot) slightly, for if it is left in place too long, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of suction cups (ventozacio) to the head confers relief from accidental pain in the head, ophthalmia (eye inflammation), migraine, and toothache; and it is instead of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And instruct the fan to not press their hand during the incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	After the incision, apply alcohol to the mouth and to the corruption of the gums, resembling other diseases in the mouth, and it takes the place of phlebotomy from the veins on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the incision made on both cheeks provides a cure, which is done by applying heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the incision made within the fissures provides immediate relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, superficial, and cephalic, as those draw the blood from all the smaller, deeper veins in the flesh, as well as the finer veins from the larger ones until they reach the three mentioned veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bellows man not to blow too strongly in the incision, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows which is blown over others and confers treatment to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to pus ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the bellows man to be a strong bellows, and of iron, for the place needs a strong section; and it tolerates only powerful but gentle blowings and is incised with a sharp knife.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The gentle bellows from the legs cause a minimal manifestation, for they draw the blood from all parts of the body, and confer relief to ancient pains from gout and kidney stones; they induce menstruation and bring comfort to pain in the bowels and bladder; and serve as an alternative to lancing of two veins, and to strangulation with rope, and two pins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these weaknesses exhaust the entire body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (ventosas) of the loin, the healing is proper to the healing of the vents of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning of the evacuation and sucks through a gentle suction, and does not prolong the position of the openings, rather it slightly lifts some, and presses others firmly, and causes the humors to come to the area by chance.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the pain of the inflammation appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then cut and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has thin, delicate skin, be sure to make an incision once and not repeat it, so the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the fan to amplify the scarification and apply some pressure, and facilitate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein is great, be sure to scarify twice, for the first incision opens the way for the absorption of the vein and its contents.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make a third scarification so that you can achieve the last (result/process).
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we want to extract the vein little by little or a small one, it is enough for us to make a single scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a solid stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an extensive incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the incision is deep, hard, rough, and its edges are very close together, then the places for the suction cups should be smeared with a softer, wider, resolute opening; if it is in summer, with aloe oil or violet oil or crushed almond oil or henna seed oil; and if it is in winter, then with birch oil or larch oil or chamomile oil or st John's wort oil, similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess [tissue] is thick, fibrous, then use oil of amber, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and at these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be with watery solutions, or with water fortified with solatrum, or with water from a cucumber, or with water from a grapevine, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose leech has a very moist sanitarium, washes its leeches in wine or in water of myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose secretions are excessive, wash their leeches in old wine or in water of fennel, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be it known that leeching should be protected from baths; it is advisable to administer the leech immediately before or after a bath for about an hour or two, and ensure it sleeps near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before ventilation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has undergone flebotomy is irritable and has severe pain and inflammation, then you should take measures to cool down, such as using milky herbs, fennel, aniseed, dill, and similar plants.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should abstain from their meals as well, including light meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in plenty of cold water, or water from the plant althaeas with seeds, and sumac, and a drink with a strong scent between wine and honey; and it is recommended that he limit his drinking and eating, abstain from meals containing chicken, cabbage, and wine.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is important that on days of ventilation and phlebotomy, drinking should be greater than food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is important to give alcoholic drinks to some people, such as hyssop or musk, which are muscaty, or alcelite before ventilation or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not allow them to take that scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	One should not perform ventilation on parts that are subject to scarification, such as the liver, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, because these members do not tolerate scarification.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those with a strong attraction of pus from a member, thus pausing ventilation over the breast in flux of pus from the pus of the nose; and they use that to dissolve the trapped ventilation within the member, similarly pausing over the abdomen and navel; for it rarifies the member and scalds it and removes pain as it resolves ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And now rests on the wounds when it occurs in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the compression and eradicates the pressure from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to happen when it rests on the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only; and in some cases, they are administered over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes, they are administered full of heated water in the patient's gallbladder ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation be filled and form pus, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs have been infused.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of an ampule administered by fire: the size of the orifice should be two fingers in diameter, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid should be the amount that fits into a palm; and in its width, at the place where it is in the circuit, it should be half, the opening should be small according to the quantity that goes into it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use erbs, roo or citrus, with thick slices of onion, lemon, ginger and parsley so that they do not damage the member in its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a transverse slice of erb or iron, where the candle is stopped over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ampule is much larger than the one we have previously used; and its quantity is less, according to the illness and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cups used for children and the weak are different from the cups used for young and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of applying this cup is to use fire from a piece of wood gently over it, and place it on the middle of the transverse ligament in the exact spot of the cup, so that the fire is lit around the edge, preventing it from burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Once applied to the patient's member, and with the position as we have described it, within a short time, when the cups are in place and do not require any further aid, the heat causes the vapor to form over that area, and the cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And adjust the cup according to your liking, and repeat if further aid is needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	It is also possible to use a cup on patients with pleurisy, without the presence of a transverse ligament or a point, and it should only be filled with water and applied to the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this bellows, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	**Chapter LXXVII**
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in all members but only in those where it is not possible to place bellows, due to their smallness, as well as the nose and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, as in the case of the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments in the infected water of wounds.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then it is appropriate to immerse the day and night in infected water, as long as they are not harmful, and do not cause any pain in the belly of those affected; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with flebotomy and bellows; and rub the patient's member until it becomes red; and place a cushion on them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the area with a ventosa, it is more effective in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the area with wine mixed with vinegar and then apply a lot of hot water; it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the duration of the bandage prevents the draining of blood vessels, and it is necessary to absorb the sweat, then place a cloth soaked in cold water on top and secure it so that the sweating stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bandage becomes multiplied, then sprinkle over it powdered vitriol mixed with gall and similar substances to the stiptics, as long as the bandage is absorbed; or place pauses on the area with crushed fava beans, and lay them down until the beans adhere to the area, and the bandage is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if, it is necessary, apply bloodletting, when possible change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is contraindicated, then the place should be rubbed with a hot compress or left with a needle in the spot until it bleeds; and when they are stopped, since those who feel any pain will soon release it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to open, sprinkle over those a little aloe tristrate, or salt, or ash, and it will soon open.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of recovery from the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and the common people, and those who do not study or read the books of the Ancients even for a little while.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it happens that this way of thinking among scientists in our land is lacking; and you should never forget this at all; I have not dedicated myself to this task except for a long time studying the books of the Ancients and reflecting on their understanding, so as to extract science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have dedicated my life to experimentation and study.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have here described in this chapter everything that relates to my science and upon which I have conducted my experiments; so that those who are busy with lengthening may shorten it for themselves and be relieved of its occupation; and I have shortened it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it motifs from the tools that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	In summary, and as a collection of fractures of the bones, those whose previous mention is necessary before we begin the remembrance of fractured limbs and various conditions of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin with the summary of this chapter, outlining the essence of the discourse; and the chapters that follow, which are for the understanding of the artificer, at leisure and focused on the truth of these matters; to you and those who are eager to learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twisting or injury, you should immediately consider starting with fleubotomy or separating it, or sometimes, if no other cause prohibits, by the elimination of virtue, or as the case may be, whether it is in a state of decay, or there is a time of intense heat, or intense friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then I am content with food consisting of herbs, veal and crab meat; I forbid fatty meats and filling myself with foods that clog the veins with lye, as long as you are careful to avoid gangrene, and if you do not fear the emission of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original condition, from which they usually recover.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the bone has begun to heal, you must ensure that the patient is fed nourishing foods with plenty of moisture, such as cooked wheat with water, rice, bread, meat, veal, fresh fish, and similar foods, and at this stage the goal is to promote the coagulation of the fracture more gently and slowly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones break when they are in the hands of men, both in the first violence and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for as long as those members are desiccated, and they are continued and consolidated those that are of their own nature at the end of the lethargy, just as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature itself adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause similar to gout, in which there is swelling that adheres and strengthens that part which is always glued and joined together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, nor does any cause forbid it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's food, food in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fractures varies according to the diversity of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of a bone in the leg is different from the fracture of a bone in the head; and the fracture of a bone in the foot is diverse from the fracture of a bone in the arm; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now let us recall all kinds of fractures, exposed in their separate chapters.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures, indeed.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diverse species of bone fractures in their nature; for some are arcoated fractures or those that occur in them like stars; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: these are the sagittal, stellate, and other fractures, both occurring and not occurring from a blow, as is done when preparing to write, and the fracture by plague and dislocation in the skull, and the small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species has its own peculiar pain and torment in restoration according to the distinct memory of its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A clear sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how it is known to be a broken bone: its twisting, and that prominence and sensation of it in the touch, only when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore if there is no appearance of twisting in the location and there is no great pain felt when touching the bone due to its agitation, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a twist or small fracture, where you do not feel pain when pressing with your hand and there is no great compression; then apply over it the medicines of which you have recollection appropriate to that moment which convenes to the location; and then make it very tight due to subtle tightness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the location when it is arched and does not split into two or another thing that does not happen in it gradually, as soon as the whole part of its comparison is torn, then you must begin from your hour to rectify it before it becomes infected.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it becomes infected with gangrene, leave it for a few days until the gangrene disappears; then apply it in any way that seems appropriate and effective.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of the flesh and the stitching of it is easier than the treatment of bone where damage has occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen it according to the recall of the flesh.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If there are severe fractures in the bones, it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or tie two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position the member in a way that is similar to its natural state while maintaining the stretched parts of the broken member; then perforate to ensure those additions return to their places, using any means and methods you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful, according to your strength, that you do not act on the patient through your painful operation or injury; and pierce yourself according to your ability, applying one tool to another in its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure to touch with your hand at the right time, and if you notice any other cause, correct it and heal it with the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid severe stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause gangrene with their operations, or they cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happening through the operations of their fanciful motions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, apply correct positioning and careful operation to that member, provide rest and tranquility; caution the patient over this and make him/her avoid any strain on that in the hours of his/her watchfulness and sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and take care of its management, and take into account all of its movements with all your strength; wait until you know the position of the member is a position secured from pain, which is the cause when one feels it in the disposition of the member's position, causing pain or injury; at this time, be aware that you change its position to another where no pain is felt; and watch over this so that the position of it remains straight and balanced, so that no deformity occurs in it when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members broken are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the elbow and similar to those, you must understand that the envelopment should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thick like the skin or the leg, you must understand that in these there should be a complete and hard envelopment, because the tightness around each part connects the large member and makes it strong from every side, so that nothing enters inside.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, carefully discharge your feces, place a suitable poultice on it, over the place of that fracture with three or four layers according to the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the poultice.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then carefully remove the splint from the most dominant part of the fracture site, and stretch it gently so as not to tighten your restriction, which you have strengthened at the fracture site.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually lengthen the wrap around the fracture site, and gently ease the restriction little by little, until you achieve a considerable opening at the site.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it around the twisted area, covering it with the previous bandage as far as possible beyond the fracture; and now your operation is on the restriction of the bandages and their gentle easing according to what we have said about the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then place a stopple or cloth between the bandages to support the curvature of the fracture if it is curved; otherwise, do not place anything in it for no reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand over the other area, and cover these sterile bandages made properly around it, if there is no inflammation or abscess present, and apply pressure to where the abscess is and where you feel the inflammation; leave it for a few days, and then tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of different types of canvas, carefully made; or of wood; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the bandage placed over the fracture be thicker and longer than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the member in magnitude and smallness; then tighten the bandages over the other area according to your initial tension; and wrap them closely around with a thread decently as we have said about tension, and it should be your tension according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the tighter the tension.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And take care that the threads are stronger in thickness and fineness, and that they be many; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in the operation of some tissues that pause the threads of their cords from the twist, it is a great error when the tightness becomes equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Indeed, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and you will not realize that between one thread and another there is less than a finger's width.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the disease is located at the ends of the bones, then tighten them in these places without applying excessive pressure, so that it does not cause harm to the soft tissues or a bruise.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes, fracture is the plague, and it causes disruption in the ligament, leading to a recurrence in that area as specified in the second chapter due to its particular nature.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely severed member is not immediately bound with steels on the first day; this is because when the member is large, it cannot be pinned down by steels until several days later, or perhaps seven or fifteen, depending on your confidence in preventing gangrene from setting in.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting as an accelerated means of restoring a fracture, most suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat or friction should not be applied: take flour from the mill, which is the heart of the grain that prevents the movement of the millstones against the walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that does not work as such, then take a thin and soft cloth, and prepare it not too thick or thin, and apply it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and migra, which is grated from milker's salvage, from all parts of the dragon. 5; myrrh and aloe from the dragon. 2; alcohol from the dragon. 10; all these are triturated and mixed with alichil water or egg albumen if the patient's condition is scorched; then apply this plaster, as it is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and confers benefit to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plaster method that confers benefit to fractures and twists: prepare migra and add white alder, from the dragon 10 times; myrrh and aloe, each from the dragon 5 times; acacia, from the dragon 6 times; and Armenian bole, from the dragon 20 times.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these are triturated in a mortar with strong pressure, and then sieved, mixed with water or egg albumen and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of plastering joints and bones to separate them from their places, causing accidental pain in those and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool and submerge it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not merely for restoration, it prevents abscesses cautiously and expels pain itself.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppy flowers, mix them all together to make a plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of quick-acting plaster applied for the restoration of broken bones and when you desire a resolution from an abscess: take roots of althae, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, whole wheat flour, all finely ground; mix them together with wine, if the member is not scorched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that with cool water from parsley or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a strong poultice for resolution after the initial one, when there is a hard apothema, is to prepare a mixture of fennel seeds and licorice root, and also of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, any other herbs, all finely chopped and mixed with either savory water, or diluted water, or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hippocrates does not specify in his work that it should be placed over the affected member before its restoration, unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made, and not otherwise; he recommends that it should be applied with a balance between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Galen also states that poultices should be applied to the broken member after its restoration, and the causes for their drying require heat, such as with myrrh, onions, and similar herbs, in the same way as for those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take half a pound of lint, horsehair from an animal's mane or feathers from a bird, and other materials, mix them together, grind them, sift them, and prepare the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the size of the wound and if it is completely separated, consider whether there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken; in this case, do not attempt to separate the bones immediately.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If, at the site of pain, there is a violent or intense sensation of pressure or swelling, immediately cut or separate the plaster from that area and prevent further application.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, soak it in hot water, and apply this to the area until the pressure and pain cease; then allow the member to rest for an hour. Next, cover it with woolen cloth soaked in vinegar or rose oil, and wrap it up; leave it in this state for the night, ensuring there is no risk of infection and that the swelling subsides, alleviating the pain in the member.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that precise procedure, applying a thin restraint with a small plaster and not tightening it too much with your initial constraint, but gently apply it to whatever needs healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, inflammation, pain, and all other symptoms have already subsided, and you find yourself in need of a plaster and restraints, then repeat that same procedure as you began with the initial treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause for these symptoms (as we have mentioned) occurs in the member, then do not drain it unless after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, as you see fit from the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that spot.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the restraints more than your initial restraints, and also adjust the diet of the patient according to their condition's improvement.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; so you should immerse it in hot water every time you take care of it; and do this for three days; and little by little relieve the tightness, and through this operation direct the nourishment to the member, and heal it gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what the ignorant restorers of a member fracture do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it is covered, and is restored according to its twists, is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon, he would enlarge the ancient wounds in their free spaces and heal them toward this.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow, which arrests all the bone within the flesh, leaving the bone thus as it was in the fist, and that is why this type is called simple; or the space cuts through a portion of the bone, cuts the flesh thereof, and does not permit the incision to pass through the rear part of the bone; and this type of fracture is called complete.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the affliction of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and it can be caused by pressure or impact upon a bone; their appearance is similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the tissue that surrounds the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the affliction of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this fracture is confined to the bone in the delicate part of the hair follicle, and that is why this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if a fracture is caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone and appears similar, causing some lamina of bone to enter the space inside, it is experienced in the concavity of the location just as it happens with the ribs when they are struck and it is the exit of their entrance into the internal space.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is primarily caused in the bones of the joints, just as it is in the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures, being separated, are painful just like stars dispersed.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And one should return to memory of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I would recognize all these types of fractures by detecting them and through the inquiry of their attempts and the evident corruption of flesh upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special capillary is known for what is discovered over the bone, it is washed, and cleaned upon it with tenet, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of the illness, and if you examine the accidents by their signs that manifest themselves as pain, vomiting of colic, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, and the appearance of ulcers and bleeding from those, and similar to them in the major dispositions, then it is clear that one is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you observe unusual accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which causes, because if the plague comes to you at the beginning as it comes and this happens during the winter, then know that you must study the skeleton of the bone from the 13th day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, you must ensure that you cover the bone against direct sunlight after six days, as what remains of the skin will be corrupted by fat, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated into the fatty tissue, covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and inflammation, you must then cut out the damaged and inflamed part, as I have mentioned before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you must examine the patient's head for the plague, and discover over the bone according to custom and method, as possible according to the figure of the plague, and it should be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter a bone infection, pus or abscess, you must oppose it with what is appropriate, and it is that you fill the area with bandages soaked in vinegar and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the abscess subsides, and be certain of the flow of pus; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you insert the bone knife at an angle, and this is the shape of it: Then apply another knife to this, slightly wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply the knife more widely than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you must choose the number of knives according to need, some being wider than others; and some shorter, the latter having a sharper point at their tip, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the knife to avoid damaging its tip and that of the patient.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, you must perforate in a circular motion around it before administering the scissors to the incisions, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus, but rather because they do not allow the term of the bone in the testis to be placed to it, so that at the edge or margin of the incision is a round extreme or edge over which the head of the bone does not protrude, resembling a small margin or circle, which prevents submersion and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these incisions a great number of which each one corresponds to the specificity of each bone, as long as you are present in all parts of the skull, the end of which is acute, the amount in length and brevity is according to the quantity of specificity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method for three types of incisions: The quality of perforating in the circle around the broken bone is to place the incision over the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is penetrated; then, change the incision to another location and stop when the amount of thickness of the ray or surrounding area is passed.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then cut with scissors what is between any two bones, and make that small hole over it in a levitative manner, as we have said, so as to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause using some tools you have prepared for this purpose, with forceps and other delicate instruments.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And beware that you handle with all caution so that the scissors do not touch any part of the patient's body.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have pierced the bone and it is separated from the tissue if it continues to be attached, take that extract, beware of scratching and biting it on the roughness of the bone with some instrument resembling scissors, but nevertheless ensure it is more gentle and subtler than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you notice any movement of the small and fragile bones, then take advantage of this with the instruments at your disposal, and apply it to cure the wound with liniment and ointment as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which dissects bone and flesh with great praise; this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have uncovered that part and paused, leave there the extreme of this slow and gentle incision from which this form comes.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the slow part is round and does not cut any cause, but the sharp part is in two cuts ahead in length, so when you have opened the slow part, adjust it to the shape of the sharp incision facing it on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the incision of one part with a small hammer until it cuts through the bone entirely, thus making it easier to turn, and be sure of the position of the panniculus so that no accident occurs in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their conditions; certainly, he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a bone breaks due to some cause attached to the panniculus (fatty tissue) in certain places of the bone, it should be cut with a scalpel at that part closest to the blade, and easily separated, as it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is detached or left attached to the bone is the fascia, which has roughness and subtle fibers, you should shave off that roughness and eliminate those fibers with finely sharpened razors that you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them in all areas as most appropriate during your operation on the fractured bone and according to the shape it has assumed.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should be mindful in your reasoning as to which razors to use at the beginning, applying the thinnest ones first and then using thicker ones as needed, without stopping until you have administered the most suitable and thinnest ones to all areas.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Place a small capillary and delicate fracture into each of the other breaks, ensuring you administer treatment according to what you find in correcting them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all those who have studied this art practice it fully.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have shown, regarding what he writes, the application in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannus (or skin) is stretched when you dislocate a bone, then take cloth from it according to the extent of the damage, immerse that in warm oil and place it over the affected area; then take another piece of cloth, either folded twice or thrice, immerse that in vinegar and water, and place it on top of the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to aggravate the wound; and finally, apply a dressing of lard, not tightening it, but allowing it to cover the affected area.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the fever's abatement; then remove that and administer medications as needed, such as raisin juice, flour of eggs, powder of herbs and aristology, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled on the affected area, when it is dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicines of the right kind from which he or she abstains and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be mindful according to your virtue that the plague in your treatment be clean; and do not use ointments or other things; nor should you add virulence to it; for when it is placed on the membranous covering of the brain, it corrupts that and destroys it, and brings about a malicious malignancy over the disease.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the brain, when due to its purification the bones are affected and even more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether, in the case of the disease, such accidents occur as we have mentioned, knowing that these are harmful to all skills.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not experience the dark color (gout) only from the medicine placed upon it, but it is due to that very medicine, then take some honey and crushed olive oil in equal parts, and wrap them around the affected area; then apply a poultice with appropriate remedies for healing until it is cured.
Capitol .iii.	**Capitol III.**
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken in one place but rather in two superior parts or sometimes in one of those small bones, so that it has two bones in it, because the fracture leaves it cartilaginous, not broken and it does not occur to it but rather atrophy, tortuosity and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece into his nose, and hold that fracture inside with your finger, and also push it from outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your convenience, and be careful not to cause pain during your operation on the patient's illness.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the superior part of the nose and does not reach that part, then you must equalize the end of the ray where the thickening has occurred.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same to it.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And on the first day of the fracture, attempt to restore it if possible; otherwise, return to the original position cautiously after seven or eight days of rest.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth from the linen into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part, or use two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, making them as thick as possible to fill the nasal cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient healers would insert the pieces in a moistened border, and change them daily, which I have not seen; instead, they would place the piece in raw egg albumen with flour powder; and leave it until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, it becomes entangled in the nose, in place of any cold, causing severe pain because it is wrapped in lion's cloth; and if you have already broken the nose severely and the pain does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use cold applications.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if, after another application of the cautery, gangrene occurs, apply a paste to the nose made of beeswax and honey mixed with vinegar or distilled water.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If gangrene does not occur after the cautery, cover it with a paste made of sesame flour and powdered hen's eggs mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it to prevent any further infection.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured in any way or there is a crack, then you must carefully extract them using suitable instruments; and then close the wound with stitches, and treat it with what is appropriate to heal and consolidate it, and apply suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a plague occurs within the nose, then you must treat it with caution and insert silver tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Capitol IV**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**On the Restoration of the Mandible When Broken**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by severe pain, observe whether the fracture is only on one side, and not split into two parts, but curved at the site of the break. In such cases, its healing is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your little finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth to support it; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert your right little finger from the outside, pushing gently to facilitate the alignment of the broken parts from within, while maintaining an even pressure with your other hand from the outside.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment so that its equilibrium can be achieved.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth due to displacement, then tighten those which you hope will remain attached with threads of gold or silver or silk; and apply pressure over the broken mandible with wax, and place a doubled cloth over it, and a large star-shaped piece of cloth cut appropriately, or a single piece matching the length of the mandible; and fasten it to her according to your equipment for the ligation, as long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And order the patient to rest and be at ease, and refrain from eating heavy or spicy foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then after three days, re-align what has been distorted and apply a powder from a mill, or white of an egg, or flour of chamomile, since you will have kept the bandage on it, and place a warm compress over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once this annex and the application are in place and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for usually this fracture tightens in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another apotheosis (infection) occurs after the application, then administer what we have said concerning its treatment until it heals, and heal that infection.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a serious one, consider whether it is a separation of bone or dislocation, then you must carefully hold those dislocations with what seems appropriate in the removal of those from the tools.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the fracture is narrow, then you should widen it through fléubotomy according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then, once you have held those dislocations and it is not healed again, open the orifice of the fracture if it is narrow; otherwise, place a padding over it with one of the applications that seem appropriate until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the fork (or bone) breaks due to a strike, it can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or broken into two parts that do not accidentally cause additional damage; it is harder to restore it; or it occurs with complications, making restoration difficult; or the fracture is like a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for that operation, when the fracture is with complications, you should have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork and assist, while another extends the leg to stabilize it.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then apply a splint to the fracture, keeping it straight and forming it according to its shape, without any prominence or concave areas.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you need a larger extension, notice where the patient's discomfort begins and place a roll of linen or woolen cloth there, as large as necessary; then extend and raise the splint and secure it with your hand while applying the splint to the fracture according to its shape.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the splint to secure it outside, because it has reached its limit, then place the patient's discomfort on their neck and rest it upon a half-sized cushion over the affected muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant should massage the affected muscle while holding the splint in place until the bone of the fracture is raised and secure; then correct the fracture and apply a splint to it with your hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel stiffness in the furcula (hyoid bone) and it is painful, then know that you must cut into it and extract those stiffened parts with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then use your surgical knife from among those you have prepared for this purpose, since you had left the furcula with the instrument that serves to cut; and this is the form of the instrument: a saw or a steel blade.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a chisel, of which this is the concave part; and its size according to what you need it for, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	You can adjust the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, with one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when extracting the sagacity from the bone is wide, and it is assuredly safe from infection, then you adjust both lips of the wound to close it with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or you fear a dangerous infection, then you employ the wound with drapes and powders according to the extent of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then insert cloth soaked in hot oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the hardness of bone at the site of the wound and its section is such that you apply a paste made from flour ground fine as albumen of egg, and place it on the surface of the wound, then stop it with lion's dung, and below that, sprinkle the dust of frankincense, if needed for that purpose, and take horsehair, which is what the Saracens use; it should be long and thick, and have a width of about a palm or so around the area; and then sprinkle double layers of powder on the wound and the paste; and take a thin table knife whose length and width are roughly three fingers, and wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth around the knife in place over the fracture; and when turned upside down, and revolved on the neck of the fracture and its surrounding area, and reduced to a compact mass, and as often as needed until the hardness of the fracture with its surroundings subsides, and this is what remains uncovered on you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the star (cast) above the broken bone is not damaged; and so that you may see the malady each day, when the ligament softens or you notice the star already damaged, then correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then suspend the patient's sleep on their side, and place a small cushion under them to keep the pressure off their sleep at night; so that by that means the supporters of their body from that side are raised, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated from the muscle; or, alternatively, their arm is bent at the elbow.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless it occurs at the site of the fracture or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the bandage if you see that it is falling off, tighten the compression and restore it, and leave it until it is healed and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and supported according to its healing stage in 28 days, and sometimes in certain cases it is cured in less time for some people.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in its lateral part, but not the entire bone, only its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the bone is broken, and it is broken in the middle part of itself, and it is not known except by touch, then according to how the fracture's figure protrudes, you shall prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with the aid of your skill.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then, place a thin sheet of cloth over the area, and apply powdered chalk from a mortar; also, use a small amount of stop (a medicinal substance) or a duplicate cloth bandage; and finally, place a side table cloth subtly beneath it according to the size of the spatula.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a thick substance to even out the surface.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly with the tongue, using constriction and the firmness of the sheet until it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the moisture daily; whenever it becomes softened, apply again and tighten or equalize the sheet if it moves from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula should be restored in X days or in 25th (part of a day, indicating a period of time).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the bandage, and be sure that it is from the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it fast, and act as we have said about the fracture of the tailbone cautery if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A broken foot sometimes snaps in the middle, and it takes time to heal; more often, its ends are fractured and bruised.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And one of the accidents when the middle part breaks is that it bends inward and causes great pain, difficulty in moving, coughing, and severe vomiting; it is evident in the hollow of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be placed between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs to the two ribs, and be delicate in the operation of it and in the placement according to every manner that is possible and suitable for it, so that the shape of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of cotton or linen, similar in texture to cloth; carefully wrap this around the broken bone, gently applying pressure as needed; occasionally adjust the bandage to maintain its curve along the spine, and tighten it with moderate tension; constantly assess the bandage, and when softened, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of any corrosion, inflammation, pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you should loosen and remove the bandage, eradicate the plaster, and correct what has occurred through the cure of it; reduce the bandage if you made it too tight; adjust its tension until healing is achieved.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly but in severe blows to the back; and the ends of their joints, when separated, do not cause immediate pain to those parts, since they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not obscured from feeling, you must inquire about his pain in these parts.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is such that it heals the fracture in these parts according to the manner possible, as it is swallowed according to what fits, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inner parts, it causes the patient severe pain and stabbing, just as much as the stabbing that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and because of this the bone presses upon the viscera; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of foul-smelling sputum; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And ancient remedies are ingeniously designed for that strange disease.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And about these things they say: cover that which prevents food from the illness that generates inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is forced out of place.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would advise this to prevent any light-hearted cause generating a severe abscess, if it does not occur; and if it does occur, then aid should be given immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also said that certain remedies should be applied to the affected area to reduce swelling and then suck out the excess fluid; it seems reasonable, yet there is fear that the swelling may push the excess fluid back into the affected area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also said: cover the affected area with cloth that has been soaked in hot oil cauterization, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, making sure the bandage conforms to the shape; and it is thus treated for illness through pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the disease causes severe constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone is pierced with a sharp point, then fear for the disease, cover it with a bandage, uncover the broken rib, and apply pressure over that instrument that preserves the integrity, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bone to facilitate extraction.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large, using surgery, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if there is an abscess inside, you cut it open and insert powders in olive oil and apply it over the area, so that the disease is cured from within the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it is advisable to raise the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can be fractured and their cartilage damaged, resembling the fractures of the spine in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to anyone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider that if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move them nor stretch them or tighten them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not hurt, then you know that it will not heal, and in the same conditions, it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in the area of the fracture and pressure or piercing, then know that the inner part of the bone is safe, and the injury will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine in the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider its weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that the stiffness has already been reduced, pay attention to those affected parts, and when you lie on your side, they gain flexibility and mobility according to their will; sometimes they rise up on their sides and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is a serious condition, and therefore do not attempt to treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause of those occurs, the cause is better and more easily resolved.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is to make incisions at the relaxation of the spine with a hot cautery or oil, or use poultices of vinegar; place that on the affected area several times a day until the pain in the cautery is relieved.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a comforting and effective bandage, tighten it around that area; and order the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where they feel pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If a fracture of the leg bone or any other cause already separated from it occurs, you must cover it with a dry dressing and support that bone; and then adjust the two edges of the wound, either by suturing if it is large; and treat it with care to avoid inflammation of the wound, as long as it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of the leg bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, you must then insert your left hand's thumb into the gap between the broken bones and bite down on the broken bone with your other hand as gently as possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it if needed, and tighten it securely.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bones broken within it, then bind them securely and support that area, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the wide [or perhaps: open].
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is nothing but communication in the extremities of those parts and are sharp at the ends and decline inward; and it causes pain to the patient at the site and piercing, and the limb is stunned when a fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should wrap that according to what you have been taught by equal experience, just as it is assembled to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or that it already declines inward towards the parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have enveloped it, apply the plaster and then place a strip of wood or canvas over it, tightening firmly without fear of fracture or removal of the stitch.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And envelop the concavity with something that fills it equally as it takes on the stricture, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess occurs cautiously, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess cauterization is sedated, and apply over it what was previously mentioned; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten that thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the bones or they are broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the assistant (or, possibly, 'helper').
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what is between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a plane of moderate roughness as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And both ends of the ligament are seen, and then it is suspended from an elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Then attend to the patient on one side; and subsequently, cast out his broken arm over a splint until it reaches the thickest part of the bone where the curvature of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And subsequently, it is suspended over some heavy cause, or the doctor extends it to the parts below; and then the surgeon places his hands on the fracture, until it returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their head with their hands; then command two ministers: one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other collects the pus from below; each of them extends themselves accordingly.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish to increase the extent of the traction, then tighten it over the fracture with ligatures and over another ligament; each of the two ministers extends themselves in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, you should place the middle of the ligature on the tendon and leave the other end behind the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, you should place the ligature at that point and over the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse that in easy water and facilitate the work, and then, when it is soaked according to its nature and applied properly, tighten it carefully if blistering does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If blistering does occur, loosen the tightness after the seventh day and place a cloth dipped in vinegar and rose oil over it to soothe the abscess, and then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of tightening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap it with clean cloth, adjust the arm upon the support, and hold your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unfold the cloth and tighten upon the arm support to keep the arm in place, unless some other cause prevents it from moving.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that it rests on the fracture that steel which is placed and firm among the other steels; it rests between each steel the width of the finger, and its length according to the break plus three parts from the whole.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten the steels with the strapping mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the strapping on the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the further away from each other the fracture is, the less the strapping should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore, depending on the position of the steels and the strapping as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its position, so do you act.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and take away the bandages on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And thereafter, consider the dressing on all wounds for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation; it is forbidden to eat foods that reach the member due to excessive tightness; and thus, rectify everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that nothing further will occur from it, do not loosen the ligature but instead wait for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm, woolen compress over the injured member, and consider at all times during night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved, or the dressing become soft; thus, rectify it entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is delicate at first until it begins to tighten; and now you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the assistant and the leg support is to tighten them in 40 days, and you will notice that they loosen and should be bathed and treated with ointments that rectify this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is slight and fresh, you will not loosen the bandage and splints for one to two months.
Capitol .xii.	**Chapter XII**
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	**On the Restoration of Broken Arms**
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, and is said to be the elbow bone, while the other is larger and is placed below the small bone, extending upward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the main or secondary fissure is only slightly broken, or both at once, they are seldom torn completely.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small fissure above is broken, its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fissure of it below is broken, its fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fissure above, it is advantageous for the doctor, as its restoration should be easy, allowing for a quick recovery before it becomes engorged.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large fissure is what is broken, then it must be handled with more urgency as its extension becomes more violent.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are simultaneously lacerated, then be sure to press the most powerful extraction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And be sure to place your hand in the position of restoration and extension over one cushion, with the wrist of your hand parted from it, more so than all other positions, and the tactile sense of your ear should be lower than all other senses, and the patient should be centring on a comfortable bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion before them at an elevated or upright position, so that the patient does not have to exert themselves.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant should extend their arm fully on one side with their hand free or tied, and another assistant extends theirs similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bone within as it reduces according to the best position possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstacles, you must reduce all the pain to its place using your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate problem that threatens the cord and does not seem hopeful for restoration, then you must perform an operation on it and preserve it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe, you have already reached this particular chapter, and therefore take care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, you must line it with a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, with greater care between caution and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over that slight gap until the abscess yields; then remove the bandage and apply a plaster prepared from powdered chalk, and place stars; and let the star be placed on that fracture both more and more firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are visible in their proper arrangements, either in one fracture or in two fragments at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater force and intensity, and as the tightness around the fragments above or below the fracture increases, reduce the pressure slightly according to how much pain the patient experiences at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to secure them should be medium in thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament over several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, as soon as you notice a problem with the member, you should apply cold water to it until the pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And allow the member to relax until it rests, then return the tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness is already relaxed and the bones have healed and resemble those before, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, for then you must soften that slightly and allow it a few days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hold the patient's hand with the power of their virtue to prevent excessive movement, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXII days, or quickly restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complications and the disposition of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and ribs.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that in the spine and ribs, fractures often occur along with dislocation, and these do not heal properly unless the movement is reduced.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or dislocation of the spine, you will find that the patient's condition worsens and lies in pain, and then support the spine over the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the physician should extend the broken bones and align them in a proper position.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover it with a plaster and stoppers, if you do not want to risk gangrene; and place the bandage from above according to the extent of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the joints of the hand, and it appears like a thread of cloth, and you make the patient press on that fractured joint, then wrap a long strip of cloth around it tightly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bandage of cloth should be in such a way that it supports the body, so that the hand is aligned with the palm; and tighten it according to need.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the exterior parts, then you should place a bandage on it and another bandage on the side left in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and tighten it, as the hand is rotated to its natural position between the joints.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the joints of the fingers, if it is the thumb, it should be immobilized according to its position and then tightly bound with the palm turned slightly upwards, if desired, using a small right splint to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other joints of the hand, just as in the middle finger, or index, or little finger, it should be immobilized with a splint on the affected digit; or all fingers can be bound together in sequence, which is better; or a small splint can be placed over it, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, the order of setting bones and opposing them - with great caution during your operation - regarding what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described iteratively.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, presenting itself in the form of swelling according to its position and the pus that forms around it.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed around the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the physician extends the ligament to its full length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is indicated to operate on the thigh, then the ligament should be tightened from the opposite side towards the knee joint, allowing for its extension, and another ligament placed around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture seems to be deeply embedded, then make the ligament proper to the joint, and extend it to the detached parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands, reducing them according to their natural appearance, and the bone is joined by a good joint; then it is necessary to cover with plaster and tension, so as not to cause necrosis of the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If necrosis occurs in the member, then leave it for a few days until the infection has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The tension should be done thus: it is necessary to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, folding it two or three times, and removing the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the limb.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and leg close to the joint, bringing the ends of the cloth from the sides of the joint, making them superior to both parts, and then turn over the leg and thigh what is superfluous of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture as well, and place one stick on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the vacuum between the thigh and leg with soft drapes, so that the constriction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then commence with a strong constriction of the middle layer over the site of the fracture using three or four folds, and as you distance yourself more from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be weaker and lighter and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the cloth to the sides until they reach the foot's ankle, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other part so that the bandage does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the compression over it in such a way that it does not cause damage or gangrene or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any cause of those arises, then it is necessary to remove it from you, and correct what happens immediately, as we have mentioned previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone itself, then cover it with what you can obtain; if not, wrap it and remove the cause, and treat that from which the memory of the pain arises until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be adjusted with the help of bandages, as we have mentioned regarding the aid and treatment of the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, one should not cause the patient's disability; and if it is restored alone, then another method should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that the disabled leg become strong again.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often ends in lasting pain, frequently resulting from inflammation and stiffness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture happens, it is not uncommon for there to be only a crack or break in the bones, which is a great cause of pain and suffering.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its joints, so that it can be put together and joined as much as possible through calculation and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and press it onto that round spot, if you need to; tighten around it with a strap as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures; take great care and act as if it were any other similar case, addressing everything that is appropriate to ensure its healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of the Broken Leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the femur; and the other is thin and is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected; for this reason, its restoration is similar to the restoration of the whole arm, and the operation is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is broken with a subtle crack, the leg is shattered in several places.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone is broken with a severe crack, it leaves a mark, and it's one of those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extensions, tension, and ligation to the stitches according to that agreement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the leg fracture is severe without any signs of improvement, the extension should be less and more gentle, and you should trust in your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the leg, there is also a cause for surgery on the arm, and when you stitch the stitches and complete the entire surgical procedure, you will take wooden splints from which the causes are removed, which are placed in places where they are left alone, and are made entirely of palm leaves; tie those to the ones that require small roughness, and be careful not to interfere with the hands, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the inner part to the outer part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, placing one over the leg's joint from one side and the other from the other side, ensuring they are tightly wrapped around the foot's base.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then attach the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle, as this structure prevents the leg from bending at the joints, keeping it in a stable position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a splint of wood should be applied according to the length of the leg, holding it in place so that it remains still and does not move.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when it is truly painful.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg daily, examining it closely and studying its condition through further observation; and you should keep an eye on it for any signs of separation or inflammation or other similar causes. And when any such cause arises, be prepared to treat it as necessary until healing occurs.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their treatment.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer a fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes experience fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely suffer fractures but instead undergo deterioration due to poor condition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become dislocated from one another, then the patient should lie on their side with their foot prepared in that position as they wait.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over that which is elevated due to the dislocated bones, and press down on those, and squeeze them, and reduce those into their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that on the foot with a proper stretch, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other reasons of which you are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as the condition passes three or four days, then you loosen the ligature, since you will find the bones entwined, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is just as knowledgeable.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if it is that some are broken, then restore those, and entwine those just as you have learned and repeat the restoration of said bones in your hands.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place this broken bone straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly on one side; and place the foot on this table which is properly arranged for you, and tighten that with a proper stretch.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If the fragment torn from the bone is two or three pieces, then place your hand over each piece, wrapped in a cloth, and press the table firmly on the bottom of the foot, standing on one of the table's ends to make an incision into the sole of the foot so that it has a good grip.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned above in other fractures from accidents we have discussed; and pay attention to any accident that presents itself.
Capitol .xviii.	**Capitol .xviii.** (Capital XVIII) - This appears to be a reference to a chapter or section heading in the treatise, indicating a specific topic or set of instructions. Without further context from the text, it is not possible to provide a direct translation.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	**On Fracture of the Condylar Femoral, Tibial, and Malean Bones** - This appears to be a heading or classification for a section discussing fractures in specific bones of the human body: the condyle of the femur (hip joint), tibial bone (shin), and malean bone (lower leg).
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hymen of a woman is torn, then quickly place her in a sitting position with her legs slightly apart, and have someone hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the midwife will gently fill the hymen with a certain amount and make it firm in the opening of the woman's vagina as carefully as possible; then the woman is made to cough, and slowly the child's two legs are raised, so that everything comes out until the head is before the vaginal opening, and the broken bone returns into place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place pillows on the back of the patient, and when they want to urinate, facilitate the process by gently pressing on the hymen, collect the urine, empty it, and return the child to their pillow in the same manner as before, then return them to their original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those times, because that is when it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and stretch over the throat of the patient a cane tube; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated within the cavity, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be filled with a suitable dressing and left for some days as recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is cracked, then administer in the restoration and healing of it the same water that we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be overlooked in these close fractures and should involve little risk, especially for those who have some knowledge and understanding of this my written work; for that fracture shows you in the best dispositions for restoring and tightening it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When a fracture occurs in a man's leg, take a guargamela (a kind of splint) from above and place the leg in it; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped and laid for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when they are injured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture, especially if the bone is large, as is the bone of the thigh or of the helper, or similar to these, that you clean and amputate it as soon as possible, if the conditions for amputation at your disposal or witnessed by others dictate it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection spreads to the bone, then you must clean it with care in such a way that you retain the pus in it while you cover it with a clean cloth for three days, unless another cause prevents you from doing so.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begins to restore the fracture in that limb during the day, and do not prolong it, or you risk gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If gangrene should occur, be careful not to resume the restoration of it within the ninth day, until it has subsided, and do not approach it on the third, seventh, or tenth day after, for you would otherwise cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone breaks off at an exposed joint, cover it by perforating and reducing it with your hands as easily and quickly as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extent of the fracture is beyond your own skill and the condition of it requires larger instruments, then reduce it with the tools at hand; and those tools should be made of metal, with a length of seven or eight fingers, and a width according to the amount of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary that a doctor take several of these, depending on the amount required for the treatment in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be done with a slight roughness so that it is not easily bent during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an extremely sharp edge at its margin, and the upper part of it should be slightly curved, extending from the inside to the outside.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek as "a voluntary split lip", hence the term for a small pallet.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the sharp end of it is held at an elevated angle above the prominent edge of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should be done at once, returning the bone to its place, and secured with no further adjustments.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so try to envelop the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and you do not take the instrument with good grasp, then you must insert the end of that bone into the instrument's power.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you are unable to reduce the bone to this point that we have recommended, then cut into it with the instrument that you have at hand from among the incision tools that we have mentioned; or saw through that with one of the saws in any way that is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then take hold of the one that is embedded in the bone with roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels intense pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do this in order to bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete and you submerse it in a black stippling vinegar, especially in summer, do not place any wax or other substance on the wound, so as to prevent putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then you administer staples during the final stage of bone restoration and leave the wound uncovered so that you can incise the tissue with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors cause this, leading to death or corrupt and putrid ailments, which is unsanitary.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the tightness is light, soft, different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the illness is severe or a bad one, and you are concerned about further complications that we have described, and there is pain in the area, do not press down on it; rather, wrap it with a hard cloth instead of bandages and tighten it around those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when, after one or two days, the illness begins to manifest in the legs, remove the cloth you had placed over them, and then administer something—we usually use a mixture of four ingredients that is known to be effective against such ailments, similar to this.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is also necessary for you to cleanse the wound and assess the illness each morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, ensuring that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the illness persists for many days and is not consolidated or the pus does not drain from the leg, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to prevent the illness from spreading further.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those remedies, separate those that are removed and extracted, those that are not separated and place the member, causing pain to occur, pierce yourself to incise those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you encounter a wound that is infected or gangrenous, it is stenosed, or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then know that you must apply to each of these what suits them for the cure, which is preceded by a narration in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I should say and you present your case: when the flesh is broken, protrudes over the member along with the bones of the thigh and its helpers, resembling those of the larger members, and do not attempt to attract it or extract it, as you may cause death through these attempts; leave it be until it can heal on its own, for strong decay may occur within 2-3 days; and treat the wound if you have seen it, but leave it be if not.
Capitol .xx.	**Capital .xx.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Regarding the treatment of a hernia that occurs in the aftermath of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Various complications can occur with this hernia following the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the affected member; thus, it hinders the member from performing its natural functions.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	If the hernia is recent, consider administering those medicines that have been proven effective, such as aloes, senna, and other similar ones; take some or all of these, and apply those with a stinging quality, or white honey, or bitter vinegar, and press them onto the hernia in a moist state, and constrict it firmly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And do not remove the pressure for several days; then loosen it and apply another treatment, as long as the hernia remains; or wrap a thin sheet of lead around it, because lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is already agreed upon and the necessity requires cutting that away from its original position, then split it by the most superior part, cut off the superfluous and prominent, or quickly remove that until it is healed again; and tend to that as long as it is cured.
Capitol .xxi.	It appears you've provided a chapter title or identifier, "Capitol .xxi." Without the actual text following this header, I cannot offer a translation or interpretation. Please provide the text that follows "Capitol .xxi." for me to assist you further.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures: Once healed, and appropriate attention given to the delicate and frail member, it returns to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member restored to its natural state, it should not be subjected to any harmful causes: among which one is excessive solution of the ligaments and bindings, or excessive tightness of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition to the member; or an excessive accumulation of impurities; or excessive movement at inappropriate times; or weakness of the blood vessels in the affected area due to the illness, and its overall debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to restrict the patient's diet and make their heart tender while the pain multiplies within them; administer baths; and apply heat and pleasure to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply pressure over the member, so that the pressure draws the mot nutritious fluid to it, or continue washing with lukewarm water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the healing of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and surgery is forbidden from them, covering.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an accident occurs with a member already restored, the healing of it from crookedness and misalignment of the broken bone should be prioritized; the shape of the member is corrected, but nevertheless, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, as long as you receive the opinion of someone who knows that member has been newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many times, one sees foolish doctors and healers who have practiced this in our land; and this operation is most shameful, causing great fear of the sign of which it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the recent weakness and stiffness are due to inflammation in water containing soothing herbs, such as alder bark and roots, and melilot, similar to those used in traditional medicine, then apply a compress with a mollifying plaster mixed with good oil; or take a thick mucilage of alder bark and apply it in layers with a gauze made from pigeon droppings or olive oil, and cover it with the plaster; or use fig leaves that have been dried and twisted into threads, similar to those used in certain medical treatments known as consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes, it is dissolved with gentle friction against the most moist parts, and the affected member should be moved regularly throughout the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	When deformity has already advanced and it is strong and curved into a stone-like state, requiring treatment with iron, then it should be noted that the pus on top has disappeared and the continuation of the bone has been dissolved, and it is incised where superfluous matter from this joint meets the bone using delicate bone scissors, and ease is administered to that which is excessively stressed by this condition.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the body's joints, preventing movement and distorting the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and significant damage to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, for if it is tardy, the location becomes stiff and the reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, one should not be stretched or moved excessively during the appointment, as sudden movements cause spasms and pain in the joints.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this occurs, you will notice that you need to perform a flabotomy on the patient, and then place something warm between their thighs to relax the aperture; and then immerse the affected member in warm water and oil, and reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the water, and then the memory of it will return to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the caps of displacement as previously mentioned in the fracture; from the departure of the upper body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of mandible dislocation, let us speak.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both mandibles are dislocated due to inadequate treatment or slight movement, they may be slightly displaced and softened; or they may be completely dislocated with a complete tear of the joint, resulting in excessive salivation from the injury, preventing them from opening their mouth, and their tongue is wrapped around itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	If the dislocation is slight, it may return to its proper position on its own with minimal cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to immediately administer a reduction of the dislocated bone without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's condition, and the doctor should insert his thumb into the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, and all other fingers should be outside, which engage each other; and he commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and to relax them so that they return to their proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved without delay, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they are returned and positioned correctly, and the opening of the hernia is closed and not relaxed, then apply a layer of gauze soaked in rosin and wax; and soon the ligaments will become easier.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And have the patient lie on their back, with their head positioned between two pillows, so that they do not tilt to either side; and do not force them to eat anything; give them a mild diet, until the pains subside and the mandibles are relaxed, then let them eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And have them drink and eat easily, without forcing their jaws open, as long as the mandibles are relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and not restored to their places, then fever and continuous vomiting occur, and the patient's belly is severely strained and he vomits pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know that it is a loss; and often times, the patient dies within a few days of this occurrence.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the fork (clavicle) and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fork (clavicle) is not displaced from the shoulder inward due to its connection with the leg; however, sometimes it is displaced outward, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient seeks relief on their legs and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then constrict the area with your palm strongly, so it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then press upon that compress and poultice, strengthening it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Place the end of that which is dried on the thigh, and continue it to that, so it is not dislocated in any day; then cover that it be reduced and enveloped as we have said, and according to what your equipment allows.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then press upon that compress, and poultice, and restraint, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this treatment, cure is achieved when the end of the muscle is reduced and returned to its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that a muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is detached from its attachment on one side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from its attachment above the muscle, and this is done carefully; it is not dislocated from behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out from its attachment on the inner side after the tendon, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where there is much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to certain men through a blow or fall that the muscle becomes inflamed and swollen from the sudden spasm, and is dislocated by what has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Now, as you realize this while you are overexerted from it, you will proceed with the treatment for its cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of the muscle is known when it occurs in places where you should not touch; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, as you find different manifestations between them; and you find in the head of the muscle a hollow place and leave the titillic after touching the head of the muscle just like a finger, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position nor move it without pain.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle, and you find obvious touch sensitivity, and it is not covered.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, light reduction is made when it is fresh and the injury is recent.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the attending physician raises the patient's hand over their head; then he places ties beneath the patient, holding the joint firm in its place, and the physician raises the patient's hand and extends it; then he leaves it there so that it returns more lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, what we have said does not lead to a return to health, and considering the onset of the dislocation, several days later it is necessary to wash the malady in hot water and administer remedies that soften and relax the affected parts as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and these should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on their back and rested with the affected area between levitation and tension; the physician then places his hand over the area of hope, raises the head of the muscle vertically, and pulls the patient's hand away so that it is no longer painful to move the joints; another assistant holds the patient's head to prevent pain in the joints, as soon as it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: so that you cause a man who is taller than the hernia to be present, and he stands on the opposite side of the hernia, and inserts his muscle between the hernia's tickle and lifts the tickle of it upwards towards the openings above, until the hernia is suspended in the air, and another assists in pulling the hernia from the openings below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the hernia is small, then find what else might be causing it to protrude, so that you correct that, for otherwise the displacement will return soon enough.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in this other manner: take a long stick with the head of it shaped like a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it below the hernia; so that as you drape lions' hair over the top of the stick, the hernia rests according to the length of the stick, and stretch your hand towards the other side, extending it to the other part with strength, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, use this treatment: take a stick, its length should be about two arms' span wide and four fingers thick, and shape it according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then, cover the head with linen cloths to prevent the stick from causing further harm.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then, pause and place the stick under the patient's chest, extending your hand or arm over it, and wrap the stick around the helper's arm and the end of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then, pause your arm on a scale at the appropriate width, extending your hand towards the opening, and suspend the other side from the opposite end, so that the joint is stretched slightly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is completed according to any manner that is within your power, and you perceive that you have stopped the titillating sensation of itching with an adequate amount of wool; then apply a paste prepared from powder of wheat and egg albumen over all the muscle, so that it is thoroughly mixed, and tighten the titillating sensation by gentle compression; let the dressing be placed over the paste, and attach the patient's hand to the collar of the bandage, and leave it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And be sure to restrict the patient's diet to light foods, as long as the affected member is comfortable, as it aids in the healing process.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then provide more substantial food after seven or five days, and ensure the patient moves around; if there is no pain or discomfort, then healing has occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity or any other cause, be sure to administer a cautery with three parts, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and compression are reduced on him several times, but it does not heal and he cannot raise that arm to its original position, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never remain in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In the case of dislocation, you must first reduce the foot and ankle or the joints behind, using pressure and extension to the muscles, until it returns to its natural position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the same compression should be applied to the other affected area, treating it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing process becomes critical in the affected member and there is delay in its movement, then the disease uses numerous baths several times until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and seemingly returns to its place with difficulty; it is dislocated completely, particularly at the front part as opposed to the rear part, and the dislocation of it does not hide itself from your view or touch, according to the figure by which it is dislocated. When you adjust the dislocated hip joint back in place, this becomes clearly evident, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And be aware that you should carefully reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches an aposteme (a stage of inflammation), because if you allow it to reach this state, it is difficult to cure it, and strong remedies are needed. Especially when it occurs at the rear parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, causing great pain and sometimes even death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And for the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, his hand should be extended towards two more, and his arms expanded, and the rest of the doctor's attention should be on the thigh and knee, pushing the joint with the thumbs of both hands until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending his hand with his other hand, striking the knee with the thumb of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and they hold this view of two assistants each, so that the extension is not hindered.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that it may remove those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the hernia should be placed over the paste in which there is tightness and the application of white of egg, it should be extracted with relaxation and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And it should be loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not being stretched, you should reapply the plaster and ligament, and leave it for a few days until it is extracted; and then you should loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of a joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moisture in a bath and gentle friction, and compression, as long as it alleviates; or rest on the affected joint, if it's a case of excessive motion; and apply binding, keeping that over the bone by day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then bind that and immerse it in a bath; when it becomes loose, rub the joint with warm friction, repeating over it as many times as necessary, until it stops being painful due to motion.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the immersion of water, until it is calm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a hot, moist compress on the split of the cow and press firmly over it; do this several times, as that part is wet and returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In cases where the hand's joint is dislocated, its reduction is delicate, unlike other joints, but it is essential to act swiftly during the reduction when the joint is dislocated, ensuring that the location is not exposed to further damage or inflammation.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocated joint involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their arm, while the doctor applies pressure with their hand or palm over the joint, pushing it back to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been applied to the patient's stomach, in which case the patient should place their back on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred before the palm was applied to the back of the hand, then the patient's arm should be positioned intrinsically on the table, allowing the doctor's hand to act upon the joint's proximity.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage around the hernia and leave it be; do not delay, for if you do, the pain will increase and you will not be able to reduce it as the days go by.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may be bent according to its natural curvature; it does not indicate any illness, but rather that the hand is relaxed and cannot grasp anything; then you will know that the nerves are crushed or stretched, and in this case, only a cautery near the affected area can reduce it, and it provides great relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the pain returns, apply the bandage we have readjusted and leave it in place for several days; then loosen and reapply it and exercise your hand on it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and a severe pain occurs, then apply water to the affected area and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, joints are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated, either at the base of the thumb or on the palm or abdomen, you must pull the finger and apply pressure to reduce it, until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the end of the finger, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, following that second account, do not stop disengaging it during the day and practicing movements, and apply it at night; do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is displaced in the mother's womb, hold it as such and apply this to the first operation of tying it, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, apply this when it is displaced in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	**Chapter XXX.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	**On the Treatment of Dislocated Spinal Vertebrae.**
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae of the back or neck, and they are reduced to their proper places, but remain somewhat shaken, then it is not a complete cure, for death may result from the injury.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the expulsion of the malady is against their will, and they cannot retain it; often certain members of the body become mollified, or both legs, or both arms, or one of these; or a spine is dislocated from its place, often times it is dislocated and often times removal of these to four parts is accomplished.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, when it is dislocated at the rear parts, it is called stiffening.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for it is that you consider whether the stiffening occurs from childhood, because in such cases there is neither cure nor complete healing for it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where you see it from accident or impact or similar causes, the ancients have described lengthy methods of treatment, some of which are beneficial; however, I have already been brief about that from which little excuse can be made due to its extreme nature, through my proximity to understanding, to which I have exposed and formed myself using various instruments for this purpose, which I will now demonstrate and spread widely.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that the inflammation that occurs at the base of the foot is neither cause nor cure for that part; it resembles what is done at two seams.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And for those, it is not cured but what occurs in the back itself due to that which you have mentioned.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient's condition has spread across their face, pressing equally against the wall, and has extended below them causing great pain so that their foot cannot be moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then place a straight stick directly beneath them, pressing into the ground at the foot's end around their head, and another stick on the other side of their foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the stick, but it is not fixed in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then cover the patient's head and let the thick limbs lie firmly; extend the end of the limb to the foot which is the head of it, and tie that to it; tighten the other ligament over the hips of the patient, covering their buttocks, and make the legs fit into the stocks; and adjust all the ligaments and tie those to the other foot which is beneath the patient's feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister should stretch the limb at the joint of the foot, and the limbs and ligaments in their places where they are attached, but not so tightly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while he waits for it to return, or he may rest on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until recovery.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If recovery does not come about in this way, then take a table whose width or length is three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall of which we said that it is closest to where the patient's affliction lies.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, pressing firmly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open it again with your hand; and since you stand on the ground, hold the patient's head in the back of each fist, their length being about a arm's length, and hold their head firmly in the back of each fist, too, so that there is no further harm.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another fist where the turn is, and twist it in both directions of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of each fist is a notch where the turn is made, the length of which is equal to a palm where it is twisted; and in both other fists it is similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the foot of the patient in the wound from which he suffers most, and the ligaments that you have strained on his thighs in the turn where they are attached to his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then apply to each turn and place a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor bends the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then, having returned the spine to its place and secured it, apply a dry poultice of flour over it, and cover; then place on top of the poultice a lint-covered board whose width is about three times the affected area and its length covers the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then use the ligaments as we have said, and employ subtle nutrition to aid in healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any signs of recurrence appear in the area at the end of treatment, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse the application of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and this is already being administered in that place a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there occurs imminence at the end of the spine of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is this bone which you should be particularly careful about, because if medicine is not administered to it promptly, it will cause certain death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated so much, and it does not happen to those who suffer from other joints with small removal and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four manners, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forwardly, or backwardly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forwardly or backwardly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation inwards is when, upon adjusting the patient's leg to the healthy side, the diseased side becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the diseased side, and this is the location where the post-traumatic cautery becomes inflamed, so that the head of the bone has already been damaged here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs outwardly is that the accidents of the leg are opposed to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And when dislocation occurs in the joints in front, it expands its leg according to its full extent, but nevertheless does not bend the pain that is in the knee, and if it pierces to go and cannot return to the joints in front; then the urine of the patient is retained and the swelling of the knee is inflamed, and you must move the patient's leg on the bed.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one who experiences dislocation in the joints behind is that they do not expand the affected leg, nor can they bend it where it doubles over; and the patient's leg becomes shorter than the other, the swelling softens, and the top of the joint turns to that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, when the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been reduced by itself or through your treatment according to its position, then it is not in need of further cure; and thus it is not appropriate to make any additional projections.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then cut to this that you return the joint and extend it within and without, and turn it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not need other care.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the joint below, or use a bandage, or a tightening device placed over the leg; another minister should extend your hand from above onto the patient's thigh; and yet another should hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the leg or the inner part to angle the joint of the fork, or the back part to the front of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And make the extension of all these at once, as long as the patient's illness is raised to their upper body and the legs hang down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this specific type of extension is particularly suitable for all four (body parts).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to use all sorts of things for its treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, one should pull the intestines back to their original position in the area between the root of the fold and the place where the hernia protrudes; and finally, extend the ligament from the part that angers (or narrows) up to the highest point of the fork (of the bones).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then apply another strong pressure on the hernia, press the thick part of the affected area, and extend it outside with a forceful extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specific type of treatment is for the lighter cure by which this member is returned to its original state compared to other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excised from you and you do not follow the treatment of this specific type of cure at all, then know that both feet of the patient must be bound together with a strong, light ligature on both the toes and both the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be such that it is four times the thickness of one, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by a difference of two times its thickness.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the leg, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it should be from the ground two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young person to cut off the top of the hernia, and suspend it from another young person, while another young person reduces the hernia with firm pressure, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	During the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation in the joint that has come out, it is necessary to keep the patient immobile on their side according to what we have recommended regarding the immobility of the affected limb; and tighten the ligament on the injured thigh specifically and on their leg.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks should be placed as supports, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and the sticks should be properly adjusted at the midpoint of the affected leg, over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the hernia is not damaged by the stick between the thighs, so you must prevent any stretching to the parts left open.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand completes the reduction according to the art (or method).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you reverse the process, it will be very difficult; otherwise, hold it diligently and as we have said regarding the reduction by means of that (previous) immersion.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient is comfortable on their sides.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected limb, then with his other hand, he applies pressure to that extension, and maintains that position until the dislocated part returns to its place.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not extend the patient on their side, but elevate them slightly above the ground; once you have ensured that they are resting on a firm surface, just as we said about the placement of the body on two parts, and that their face and limbs are extended, as we mentioned previously, there is no further harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, since you extend two legs from the patient and when you see those folds and the patient extrudes their leg and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and then you adjust two things and place a plaster and external bandage so that the opening is not widened in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligature and plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those folds in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore release the patient from rest.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, and remove that according to your original stretch, and release that in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then gradually dislodge it, causing the patient to walk slowly on some surface for a few days, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of a dislocated joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outwardly, inwardly, or to the sides, and not forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated joint is that you command the patient to apply pressure with their leg on the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of the joint in all ways is to make the patient cease pressure, if possible; place their back against something, and rest their foot between their legs; then grasp the dislocated joint with your palms, and press them together over the joint until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its healing is that its leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to the leg so that it sticks to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove the bandage.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for a few days, as long as they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia at hand is not possible, then administer a strong extension to the treatments mentioned in the preceding description of cure.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter .XXXIII.**
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	**On the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation**
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot, at times, is dislocated either entirely within or entirely outside the joint, and this dislocation can be treated internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen, proceeding towards the joint where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation is of gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joint's movement and then gently pulled back into place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the case of a complete dislocation, you must immediately cease the patient's movement and have them hold a strong and steady position behind their back at the middle of the affected joint.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then with your right hand, gently lift the foot from the dominant side, and with your left hand, support the lower part of the foot in the area of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left, for two movements, extend it; and push the toe of the foot with your right hand against the bed frame as you work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And on the third movement, push the toe of the foot towards the bed frame, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one movement or two according to this manner, and turn the foot inside out, that is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again, as that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are unable to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly over them, and compress between their thighs, and you have already wrapped them in a blanket so that they do not become cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the surgeon should take hold of the patient's legs, and another minister extend the foot according to its joints or ligatures that lie on the collar of the foot; and another minister should extend each of these ministers against the extension of his part, and the padding between the space of the sick person should retain this, so that the work of him is not pulled from the parts left beyond his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor should dislocate it with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy part on the opposite side, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction is healthy, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligatures strongly, and tie the foot with ligature to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the ligature on that is not tense and does not hurt it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the inflammation subsides, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or the fourth, remove that; and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If, against the rules, one has to move before that space is completely healed, it's not without risk that the dislocation will be worsened and left untreated, which can lead to permanent damage.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the infection occurs through a cut, then apply that which we have previously mentioned regarding treatment and dressing, in place of healing and moisture, until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: The missing content seems to be a continuation of the medical treatise, given the context.)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of foot joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	For those who have a dislocation, it should be pulled with a little extension; and for one that is not difficult, it should be quickly reduced.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in any of the three joints of the foot, you should then make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on the ground or on a table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you should place your foot on it, and press the sole of your foot on the affected area to prevent any further dislocation, and apply pressure until the joint returns to its original position, ensuring that it is no longer out of place in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a board under the patient's foot that supports the entire sole, which has two ends, and tighten it with a suitable and firm structure for three days; afterward, remove it and allow the patient to walk normally for several days until healing is complete and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that occur due to disease, fracture, or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs, and you take up the task of healing it and restoring it, you may often see instances of complications leading to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, it is not enough to presume over the healing of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, slowly, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and that he uses only gentle medicines that do not cause side effects, leaving the diagnosis to divine judgment, except for those cases where you hope for salvation from destruction, alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, strive as much as possible to reduce it from the beginning of the cause, before resorting to side effects.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns to its proper place, administer treatment with a gentle cautery and care for the wound using appropriate drying poultices.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs as a fracture and the bones are separated, then you should perforate their joints, and do as we have said in simple ailments of this kind that come before in these places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be vigilant and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my instruction; for this is better for you to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and brings greater health to your true body in its proper time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
