Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its contents and by the examples and explanations it contains, I believe that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the most important operations, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, being the most complex of medical arts and sciences, facing a decline in our era and region due to the lack of understanding and study, only a few small descriptions of it remain in the books of the Ancients, which have led to many errors and misconceptions, as the intentions of its techniques are closed and its power and art prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I have found it necessary to renew the order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abridgment; so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be included as an addition to the explanation and as preparation for the operation, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why our skillful physician cannot always achieve this in our time is because the art of medicine is complex, and he must first be trained in the science of anatomy to understand the growth of the limbs and their forms, the conjunction and separation of them; he must know the bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and the extraction of them; and also the pulsating veins and static ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, as he is great in his work, especially in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we have told you about anatomy, they are not exempt from falling into errors that will lead to the death of men, as you have seen many of them who, having been trained in this science, believe they possess all knowledge and rely solely on their experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You see a foolish doctor who has incisioned an abscess with a sharp object on the thigh of a woman, and he cuts some arteries in the thigh so that a great amount of blood flows inside, causing the woman to die among her pains.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who tries to pass a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state; the stone was large, and it comes out of him with a piece of his bladder, so that man dies on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for help to remove it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient's condition, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who is highly paid by a duke of our land for surgery; he operates on a black crust that was causing the patient severe pain in his side. Due to the doctor's ignorance, he removes the fracture without allowing the wound to breathe, using poultices and splints with excessive tightness.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then, according to their desires, loosen the bandages, relax, and take rest for some days, and order that we loosen the ligatures; and thus, too, as long as the matter and the foot are healed, then we shall proceed further.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And they will be called upon it, and equipped to loosen the bandages, and by doing so, peace is achieved and thus, their pains are alleviated.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, it cannot be restrained, and the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until the disease becomes perilous.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And behold, another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it is left to fester for some days, until the malignancy of it grows powerful under his care.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the acuteness of the pain is from melancholic humors, and it does not cover that it will reach him entirely, but rather, it should be in the member that suffers, so that it be completely hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and the other is in a work which is perilous to major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are discussed, which involve error and fear; it is therefore necessary for you to keep this in mind and set it aside, so that the people do not take the wrong path and slander you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means by the grace of God for salvation and glorious success, leave behind the terrifying illnesses which are difficult to cure, and set aside your weapons of fear, so that cowardice in your faith and within your name does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, both now and in eternity after your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	He already dissected in some of his wounds:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad sicknesses improperly, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already devoted yourself to this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered deals with the feet, in the forms of instruments and the devices of cautery, and all that is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and vents, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and repositioning, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered on the inner parts of the foot, and on the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and acute medicine, and the remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatise of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documentation of it is a long and prolix topic, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and already many savants have spoken of it, and there are disagreements among them, and to me, a small part of their discourse suffices, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will confer to every complete whole universally, which is of matter or its matter, excepting two complexes, which are complexes that have their own matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex that is dry and hard, matter becomes disconnected; some have said that cautery is beneficial to it, while others have said the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for disease that is of a quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a disease that is dry and hard due to heat and dryness be cured by that which is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite argue that cautery is beneficial for all dry and hard diseases seen in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the complex of fire, you find the human body rough.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And they say through the argument of that person, that they have already experienced this several times before in their discoveries.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable to attempt this without prior experience and practice in the art of cautery, as he who has mastered the various techniques for treating different conditions and the causes of these ailments, as well as their symptoms and the passage of time, will be more successful.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complex cases, there is no cause for fear, especially in painful and moist ailments, as all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree on the treatment with cautery in such instances.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, are superior to medical cautery, because fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without harming other members or causing great pain.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of medical cautery, on the other hand, reaches members distant from it, and strongly causes difficulty in healing the ill member, and greatly aids recovery.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not make it superfluous; indeed, it is already known to us through experience and the long service of studying the art concerning the truth of causes; therefore you are excused from the length of this discourse. And if it were not that I wish to keep secret in this brief pause the fire's power, which reveals the quality of the operation on bodies and its expulsion of ill-health, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would serve to sharpen your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know this, children, that the time for making cauterizations and applying compresses is when it is most convenient in the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by time's accident is overcome by the youthfulness of what cauterization removes; and especially when cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, severe and sharp, which do not suffer delay, because it is feared those that come later might bring further harm, it is better to seek relief as soon as possible.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so you must not sit on your feet, oh sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who do not understand that the pain caused by this illness, which is healed with cautery, does not completely disappear, and that is where the problem persists.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not understood as such by those who treat it in that way, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause why pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet cautery may be superfluous over medicine because of the desire for its effectiveness, virtue, and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the nature of the illness and the location of its pain, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; for the illness on which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in few members with little excess and humor, so when cautery is performed for pain and similar symptoms like that, it is possible that the same pain may not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is said in common speech that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not to those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profit from medicine or any other cause with cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one applies the methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said in antiquity that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that this only happens in certain bodies, but cauterizing with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you apply fire to it, the gold melts by the heat of the fire, and sometimes some sheets fall into the fire so that the artisan can catch them because of the occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterization with iron must be done more gently and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have organized those from the head down to the feet, so that later you can ask him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterization for head pain caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers warmth and dryness to the affected part, which is twofold, being a cause of sudden and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corss, from the head to the extremities of the senses and of the auricles, flowing with sweat, and also numerous pains in the teeth and throat, and generally in any malady that occurs through cold, as well as in cases of paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: first, you must command the malady to be evacuated using a laxative medicine, for three or four nights, according to the severity of the illness, the patient's age, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head, and make a cut between your fingers on a clean bench, and place your hands on the patient's feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your palm's edge near the root of the nose between their feet.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Yet, if the affected area of the middle part of the body has been identified, mark that place with a try, and then take the olive cautery whose shape is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the clean area marked with a try, in a way that it descends, so that your hand is constrained little by little, and you remove that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then gently lift your hand and examine the area; if you see that some bone is already exposed, along with an amount of foul matter, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that spot, or another from that one, especially if it's cold, as long as it's visible to the bone, which I've mentioned to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area, and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the area soaked in borde and leave that on the inside to destroy the wall of fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a four-part medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the arm gets better and more youthful, so it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said that some of them use a cautery on the cord within the bone and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove this that is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Others said that with the cautery to prevent the fracture, it strengthens the bone entirely, and this is the way to achieve small fractures:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place the vapours of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not have the expertise to view these two types of cautery instruments as a whole, but according to some, it is better to use none at all if there is a risk; and in my opinion, when it comes to health, what works best is what has been proven effective; especially when the head is exposed due to the rupture of continuity, as we have witnessed in other parts, and most importantly when the nature of the malady is feverish.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that comes first is indeed safer and better for me; and from there, to that instrument, I direct this work towards health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and this persists in the disease for a long time, and various treatments such as herbs, combs, plasters, ointments, alums, calamin, dog's feces, goose fat, and similar things are used, especially if a cautery has already been performed which does not alleviate or benefit from any of those causes, then consider that the nature of the disease is strong; and if there is no significant inflammation or great pain, perform another cautery after this one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that part of the patient's head where the hair is parted using an internal cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the hair and expose the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the area known as the 'base', which is where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand gently there, do not expose the bones, for this malady causes great pain distinct from all other burnings on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, for you know that the cautery which treats the corns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one applied to the middle part of the head; this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capital chapters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe headache occurs at the temples or there is pain within the skull, it is treated with medicated cap treatments and other remedies previously mentioned for head maladies; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization in two ways may be applied: either with acute medicinal fire or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	You may use cautery or burning medicine when you take a hot compress, and cut it off and amputate both ends of it.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the place of pain in the temple with a lancet, until it is felt to be in the right place, leaving the thread there, as long as it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then you should apply a tight bandage to prevent further constriction, and leave it for three hours; afterwards, remove the compress and let the affected area rest for two or three days, and then apply a cold bath until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you should treat it with a poultice until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you find that these methods are not effective, turn to some other burning medicines that you have written about in the two previous treaties on burning medicine.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Make the cauterization with this method: ignite a cautery whose form is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and it has a small prominence in the middle part.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then apply pressure over the pain area, holding your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that clings to the specific part due to the heat of the iron is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vessel, raise your hand so that the artery is not sealed, preventing the flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a compress with salt water over the area and leave it for three days; also apply a lot of heat, and treat with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this recent wound.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating an ancient wound as described in the previous treatment and divisions of illnesses, and if the cure does not take effect and the pain persists due to a lack of adequate treatment with either knife cauterization or fire cauterization, then you should ignite the cutler cautery until it is whitened. Place your hand over the area of pain along the length of the affected part, holding firmly for a moment as you incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the mandible, which is crucial for chewing, and that the fracture is not adhered and that the nerves, which are affected, do not experience spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the prevention and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is damaged, as in the case of its injury there is fear, especially for those who ignore what they do and are not diligent or hopeful; and let the operation begin on them at the outset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And now come to the recollection of the regulation of the flow of blood from an accidental injury of the artery according to their manner, in their place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to the cautery and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize them in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you find that the cautery we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial tightness with two blades is effective, it is a better and more efficient cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When ear pain is caused by foreign bodies and is treated with cleansing and other remedies as mentioned in the previous division, and the pain persists, then apply heat with a cautery. This is known as the "puncta", which has this form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the puncta close to the heat source, and it should be rotated around the entire ear or moved in a circular motion, depending on where the pain is located.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Once the ear is treated with the cautery, continue to apply heat little by little until the area is relieved from pain.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with pointed points is done on the entire ear and some remain, then treat the remaining spots until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of tortuous (or twisted) parts.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous (or twisted) part that is cured and the cauterization thereof are merely of the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of maladies.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	A careful cauterization is necessary for the species that should be dried out or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When treating that species of tortuousness with pulls and contractions and groaning, and you do not apply your treatment, then know that you cauterize the malady in three places: first, you pierce the auricle, second, you make a small incision in its temple, and third, you join the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, for relaxation comes only from the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize the base of the ear with a hot iron, placing it slightly above the skin, and on the temple, its length according to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the amount of the substance of the cord is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is especially from the cutting tool, whose shape is placed before the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as it looks almost like a sight, and take care to remove any excess sharpness from the blade.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what has been said does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all the parts of his head; also cauterize the middle part of the head as we have said; and cauterize the armpit.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it is carefully cleaned with what you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion performed by heat.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient hot drinks and pills in the beginning, the servants will prepare them with a clean mouth.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply the plaster to their chest as described in the plaster treatment text.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it several times, as that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the order of those steps that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if they are well, it is good; otherwise, make three cauterizations to them in the last part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, apply pressure to reduce the swelling of the affected area, and properly take care of the cautery that follows.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you can add more pressure and the patient tolerates it, perform the cautery on the middle part; and if you need even more pressure, cauterize both the upper and lower parts.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Properly care for the area that has healed; and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the treatment of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Now that you have understood the process of purification for the head in accordance with what we have mentioned; then carefully remove the patient's hair, and cauterize the middle part of the head, and cauterize all parts of the head, and cauterize over the rear part of the body, and make three cauterizations over the spinal columns of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much strain and the pain bears tolerance, but the pain is intense, cauterize with four cauterization tools on the spine of the back, and later apply cautery until the intense pain of the patient is relieved, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then take care that it heals properly; this cauterization should be with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epileptics should not be cauterized; this is only done for epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so it is necessary to purify the patient's brain from the beginning of their illness, as well as with other cures we have mentioned in the previous division when the disease is severe and resistant to medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to the servant for several days, improving their diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with a hot iron at the middle of the head, as previously described, and make another cautery on the occipital bone of the patient, and over any other corns of the head that have been cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and resilient, then cauterize as described, while having a paralytic and soothing effect on the body over the cervical and dorsal spines.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And make the olive cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick flux, then cauterize those parts with the cauteries that we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive declination towards melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then he should drink something that purifies their brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, and make a decent cut on the circle around it, and place pressure on that in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel relieved, and be held from every side.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a soothing ointment; it is more worthy to be done before shearing sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that above the fire to temper it to the desired temperature, which causes him to suffer when he is most in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then make a cut in the middle of the affected area on the patient's head in a circular motion, and release it so that it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient every day for a week, with his food and other remedies as needed until he is cured; or if you wish, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery, one that moistens the brain equally. This is a special kind of cautery which soothes the mind.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that cold compress on the edges or in the form of goose grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the drainage of water from the swelling.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the beginning of water in the swelling is declared according to the signs that I have mentioned in the preceding section, then it begins and provides the patient with something that purifies the top of the swelling, and watches over all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And do that immersion in a bath with herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that spot with a hot iron; and cauterize two spots with two irons over the temples if it is the beginning of water in two swells, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one swell.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterization should be done at that length along the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to knowledge that is derived from arteries and amputation of those, and caution regarding blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing tools, which thus produces it.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	**On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.**
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are chronic and through veins and arteries that are manifest in the external part of the head, it is observed that superfluity of fluid causes spasms of the muscles, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of hot water in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle part of the head and two cauteries on the neck between two temples, and two cauteries on the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize that across the entire surface of the coil of the eye above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization of nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat a case as we have described in the previous section and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and make the patient drink the concoction for three nights; then shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized cautery or olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply cautery with a clamp to both eyes, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the fire so as not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the form of this cautery with a clamp is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening of the eyelids with a cautery.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, apply cautery to that eyelid with a clamp-like cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply cautery to both eyebrows with a small clamp at each end, and they should be elongated from the temporals.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the hernia.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is closed.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and close the eye, apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inside out and close the eye, apply a cautery to these parts, depending on whether it is to burn or to use medicinal cautery.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is with fire, order the patient to close their eyes so that their hairs do not burn, and if you must apply it again, tighten the bandage around the eyes until the hairs are completely grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when the swelling and redness appear, place the patient's head on a low bed, and then gently press over the eyelid of the affected eye with your thumb, signaling according to the shape of a dead leaf, and this is the beginning of the signal near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a cold compress or a wet cloth over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the hot cautery whose form is as follows.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize along the marked figure, little by little, in repeated motions, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were covered with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of healing of the eye work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs raised above the point of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so lift your hand and place it there for three days, then apply a hot compress to the affected area until the pain is alleviated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then do again the cautery on that part as you had done originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural position and sealed so that the hairs do not reappear.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with a medicinal fire is that you command the patient to pull out the hairs so that they do not reappear and seal them; then make a paper cut in the shape of a fir leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap known for its healing properties and a live root or, if that is not available, mix those causes together, making it into a poultice so that it is not chilled; and spread this over the paper which is made thus in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one or both wounds; then leave the fragrant edge dipped in lard, and position the patient's head on a pillow.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then cease speaking of the medicine and apply a small amount, not too much, so that the patient does not feel the sting of the medicine, for its sting is like fire within them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as long as the patient feels the sting of the medicine, leave it and apply it to them again in a smaller dose; and when the sting ceases, remove the medicine and wash that area with water; and then consider if the eyelid is lifted up just as it is washed after constriction by fire or incision, for that is good; and if it does not return to the application of the medicine on the area where the medicine was not absorbed and does not become discolored, then your operation will be successful and the wound will heal.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of adhesion is eradicated, and treat with a definite ointment or other until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to exercise careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls from the eye, and if the eyelid after a few days becomes softened due to any cause from the hair in the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place which is softened from the eyelid, and indeed just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mistletoe leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore your treatment should be adjusted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it is not hidden from the way of correction for him who is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding the divisions of ailments and your treatment does not help, know that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head in a low position, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is neither harmed nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some warm cloth or a poultice of wheat flour on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And make the cautery of which this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is concave, thus in the shape of a cane or a feather, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to get out this way, try it carefully.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Still, he who is experienced is better at the work in hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is open, press it shut and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the abscess from them.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place the hot cautery over it; but you must hold your hand a little away from the cautery at the root of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the gray areas of the nose and burn those parts.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply a compress with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and cut as suitable in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	There is another way of cauterizing a fistula, which some masters say: enter the place of the fistula and dry it, then apply a thin layer on the fissure; pour some melted lead there; hold your hand with good tension, so as not to aggravate the patient's pain, ensuring that you cover the patient's wound with white wax or oil, so that the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through wondrous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the nose according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of Wounds**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequent accidents cause cracks in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those cracks as we have said in the previous sections and do not benefit from your treatment, then make a small incision with a knife following this form...
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and the cavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully over those cracks until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully remove the cautery when it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, in the case of an uvula, or palate, or dental abscess, it becomes swollen and broken, and an opening forms, and you apply pressure, and it heals, but then the wound reopens, you must use a cautery according to the extent of the fistula. Insert the glowing cautery into the fistula's tract and press it until the burning tip reaches the depth of the fistula, doing this once or twice; then care for the wound as we have said for its healing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the infection is incurable and healthy, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to expose the location and treat the corrupted bone as it appears in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX:**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are loosed, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then place the patient's head in a lower position, and shape the cautery so that it can be applied close to the tooth without causing great pain, holding the gum over the tooth with your hand while applying the hot cautery quickly, leaving a small gap so that the patient feels only the heat of the fire at the point of the tooth, which has been reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient gargle with salt water and hold it for an hour, after which stop it; for the tooth that has been loosened will be firm again, the gums softened will be tightened, and the moisture corrupted will be dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	About the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery should be performed in two ways: either with cow dung cautery or with fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow dung involves taking cow dung and squeezing it into a hollow in fire, then picking up some of the heated dung with a tweezers, wrapping it around the tip of the tent (presumably a kind of instrument), and immersing that in water. It is then applied to the aching tooth, pressing down firmly until the pain subsides due to coldness.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip some cloth or cotton in the wound on that side, place it over the painful tooth, and hold it there until the hot iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization must be done with care to avoid damaging the patient, especially in the case of an iron or steel tooth, and it should not be too hot so as not to burn the interior of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery according to need, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; repeat this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And be sure, by pressing the cautery against the patient's mouth with good pressure and holding it for an hour, then pull it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have seen necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are filled with fluid and humors that are not obedient to digestion due to medicines, and you need to drain them slightly, then apply the cautery exactly according to their form, having two open ends so that smoke escapes from one end while you apply heat from the other, and place the burning tip over the affected area as needed.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and place a bandage over it for three days, keeping the affected area warm with a compress until the burned tissue has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that healing ointment and bandages until it is cured.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the tube or pointed cautery for such use is conveyed thusly.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of wounds and the constriction of arteries.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the lung's surface, especially when it is accompanied by a chill from congestion, it is necessary to evacuate the malady at the onset with medicinal emollients, and then cauterize that part of the throat where the infection has taken hold.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to harm the throat with the cautery or to irritate the patient's wound, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply a cautery to that or another cautery as needed to the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of him is nailed in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that as described above until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of pulmonary maladies and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and pulmonary maladies are caused by excessive humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old condition, then cauterize in two places with cautery on the furcula at the affected spots of the lungs and another cautery in the middle part of the foot between two mamillary points; and both cauteries are nailed as described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery may be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make incisions within these; and then carefully treat that as it is mentioned to be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three points for cauterization, and there are three ways to make cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the throat, which is the aid's head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the aid's head is dislocated due to slippery moisture and does not stay during its return, you should reduce its dislocation until it returns to its normal position, then place the patient on their back or side; and lift the thigh that was affected by the dislocation towards the upper part of the body, using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery, which has two points; this is its shape.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will be when two points of the cautery are involved.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so it is subtle according to the quantity of attempt; this is its form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this rule, and thus the cauterization is made of eight points.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the member for any time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then cauterization is made over the muscle with a clamping cautery or a pointed cautery, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dried up, and the malady is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When stomach pain occurs with burning and moisture within, causing the expansion of gas, if you continue with treatment methods without consideration, it will be seen that the illness will shift to the patient's back, spreading their intestines and organs, and so three cauteries should be applied: one cautery leaving a mark on the foot corresponding in size to a finger, and two cauteries on either side of the back's ribs, forming a triangular cauterization figure; and those that are not properly adjusted will cause gangrene.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. If you wish, apply a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, also in this form; and this should be a circular cautery, like this:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it, as this cautery frightens some: you know how much point you want to apply, and then cauterize that with cautery on the points; and take care of the cure for what is preceded until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter 27.**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of the Vein.**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein arises from coldness or moisture or strong wind, and the malady has been treated as we have said, and it does not subside, then know that the malady is lifted onto its neck, and apply three cauterizations with this form and this much force on the vein beneath the hip bones, which brings about the recumbent position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not hesitate with the use of cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of moisture adhering to the quantity of the specific nature of the wound, and it is not too adjusted; and if the illness stands on the patient's feet; and if it is not, then let them sit, who has already extended their things and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutlass cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and focus the gaze of all present so that the whole body is heated and penetrates into the intestines, for here the cautery is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Chapter 28.**
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	**On the Incision of an Abscess in the Foot with Cautery.**
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess in the foot needs to be incised and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh or in the tunic of the foot, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the disease takes on great gravity and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is in the correct position; then identify the location of the hernia, and heat up the cautery that resembles a needle, whose form was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery, until the entire wound is closed, reaching the deep tissue, and until it heals completely.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And know that this form of cautery should only be used with the one that you have studied in the art of medicine is most effective, and for those of which you have removed many illnesses; however, on some occasions, it may be daring to perform this operation, but nevertheless, it is best if we follow these instructions.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterization techniques of the school of Aristotle for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking a long, thin piece of iron from the school of Aristotle, and making a point at one end, which is used on the inflamed part.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that in oil and heat it over fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery, placing two small cauteries below, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard is, and two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the scapula, slightly inclined towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries in the back parts; and a cautery in the place between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the wound in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use a hot iron cautery, like a ray and fire, to burn that area between the ribs, in order to reach that point and heal it, as we have said about the hernia.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	One should not fear this cautery perforation, for it often happens in the infected area of the fistula, where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On cauterization of the melza (or esophagus).
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the melza (esophagus) using the methods we have discussed for healing in the hernia, do not apply your treatment without first cauterizing it; the cauterization should be done in one of three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the melza according to the shape of the cautery marks on the hernia, whose shape has preceded it.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the manner we have described for the cautery of the flesh entirely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply the cautery with your hand; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery with two directions, causing the same effect as we described in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, raising the cord that is at the end of the membrane so that it lies without pressure on the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the extent of the wound.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then, with both directions lit, insert them into the space where they penetrate the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three comings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you should care for the cauterizations so that they do not become infected for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydrophobia.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterizations do not cut into hydrophobics but solely into the throat.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydrophobia using the methods we have described, and if your treatment does not yield results, then know that you cauterize in the circuit of the throat with four cauterizations: one around the epigastrium, another on the diaphragm, another on the melsa, and two between the spinal processes, as well as a cauterization directly on the foot, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the wound.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause pain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment just after applying the cautery, as two intentions should be added to it, and it will be celebrated with aids for healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the stomach should be according to the form that is previously done, and it is that which is used to cauterize the back in the shape of an olive as per its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii. (Note: "Capitol" seems to be a misprint, assuming it refers to the heading of a chapter)
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of Feet and Thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in water and filled with salt water, you should cauterize the feet on the arch of the foot between the big toe and the little finger, holding the cautery with your hand, but do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not completely remove it, as the salt water will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be performed as follows: Then make two cuts on each side with a cautery, and at the tip of the cautery blade, make a cautery on each part.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the part: one should be placed on both ends and the other in the middle of the affected area; and two cauteries on each part.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the wound open for a long time to prevent any water from remaining in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then address those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal parts are infected and humid, it is necessary to eliminate the foul humors, which are the digestive and retentive virtues located in the stomach and intestines. This is treated using curative methods and not through excessive cauterization, as often witnessed with patients suffering from malady who display exaggerated cautery on their abdomen. One should cauterize this area with a large cautery over their stomach, as previously mentioned for cauterization of the stomach, along with small cauteries in a circular pattern around the navel and four cauteries in a circular motion around the subtle openings of the bowels. Additionally, one may use a subtile clavicle cautery or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity and malady persist, one should cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, as this is a perfect cure for a condition that does not return.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are old hemorrhoids in nature, caused by a thick humor or corrupted humidity, and they do not heal with the methods mentioned in the previous section, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the pus left on the spinal ridge, forming a small triangle, and another cauterization above the navel on both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is observed that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before; also make a cautery on the tongue, and another cautery on the patient's palm using a nail cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then tend to them until they heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cauterization of hernias, they remove them through incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the hernia, you use a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert that flame into the hernia incision, and finally place your hand over it to ensure the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, you cauterize each one as we have mentioned, and then care for them with ointments until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so later.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Capitol .xxxvi.**
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is afraid of it, then use cautery for healing.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupt with corrupted moisture, then it is most fitting to attempt to heal it gently, and afterward, carefully consider the quantity and depth of the opening to be treated as previously mentioned.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then bring the cautery close to the opening that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then apply that ignited cautery to this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intercepts the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are consumed after one or two or three times, according to your need's quantity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of nerve and vein combustion; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, then pay attention to all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And tend to the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and all foreign matter has been removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the foreign matter is not from the body, then know that it is penetrating or causing corruption in its place, and falls under those causes of which there will be remembrance in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize them using a hot iron over each ulcer, especially where they are most painful.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should cauterize very gently according to a small space, so that three cauterizations will come in succession, and thus they will be more easily healed.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the discharge point on the bladder, starting from the hairline, and cauterize with a needle at another point on the right side, and at another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery at the deepest point of the pain, or two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be driven in according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix. (Note: "Capitol" is likely a typo, as it seems to refer to a chapter number)
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When fever and moisture appear, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstruation becomes corrupt, making conception delayed, and causing pain during their period, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; or with two cauteries, one on each side, or a 'key' cautery.
Capitol .xl.	**Chapter XL.**
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	**On the Cauterization of the Dislocated Ankle.**
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucous membranes infiltrate the ankle joint, causing it to dislocate, and this condition is characterized by one side of the joint being prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is compressed in it by the weight of the body.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular like a ring, for you will have already tested the tightness of the circumference around the opening as it is rotated, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the ring.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above, its shape is also used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the severity of the inflammation in all the body, and take care that only the healthy parts are treated.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII (42)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower part of the body due to friction and moisture, the ailment is treated with the water we have mentioned and should not be ignored, as it is an ancient practice. Then you should drain the malady from thick humors using foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and apply a cautery to that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the application of the cautery in that area follows two methods: either with medicinal burning agents or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two scientific methods, one of which involves cauterizing that area across the leg opening with three triangular cauteries according to this form and making sure they penetrate well.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, four cauteries can be applied over the middle area on top of the anquas (belly button).
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form is derived in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, one that is a circular band containing and burning away all the inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in chronic pain when it is confined to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize two points on the thigh at the place where you apply the malady that causes the pain; and one cautery on the shin for four days, slightly above the inner part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cuticular, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the vein.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the malady causes the pain to spread close to the place of the feet, then cauterize here with a number of points, three or four, or as many as you need.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain in the area where the cushion is placed, then cauterize it with a cutting instrument.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not harm nerves or cause great pain, and thereby do more harm to the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen some of those who cauterize on the shin and complete the cauterization, and the bed of fire is inflated until the tumor has reached the foot, and the fire penetrates and corrupts the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and thus it causes death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of a pointed cautery, of which this is the manner: make it like a circular iron ring whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or somewhat less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be the width of a night's rest; and those circles should be cut in two parts; and the length of those sides should be one or two nights, and they should be decently garnished with iron along the edges of the circles; and this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and then stop it over the opening of the water, placing the patient on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus, cauterize that area with three pointed cauteries all at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice to it, leave it open for three days, cover it with a border again and keep the ulcer exposed for several more days, and continue treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albuscas (or Albucasis), sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of regard it, and because few have we found that regard it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Apply the best cautery to him who suffers from it, and find a suitable place for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The best cautery as a medicine is that you make two circles with a perforated armature made of iron, in which the keyhole of the door is placed; let the length of the wall be such that their diameter or width is two nuts or the like.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts is such as to match the thickness of your finger, leave them open above and below, and place others around them that hold them according to this form.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then apply pressure over the area where the ankle pain is felt by the patient, and take your hand off the swelling; and take some cold water, and pour it between two circles, and its quality should be such that the fire diminishes little by little, and you hold it for as long as an hour, and the patient endures the biting and tightening of the pain — for that tormenting bite is like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and drain all the cold water from the affected ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then wrap it up for three days, applying pressure on the affected area until the swelling subsides, and continue this for several days, as it is effective in healing; this is the best treatment for young patients.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with a poultice until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread within the thigh or leg, make him lie in a position that retains water as it is done in a bath.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of the water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no exting in both parts, then tie them and place in a new wave from which the opening is perforated by a small tool according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then let the bottom of the wave rest on another wave filled with hot water, and place over it the live alkali and cause of the hot water, taking them in your hand for a moment, and then press them to the tieua ma (presumably a medical tool) for good compression, and leave the wave that descends from the hot water into the opening left by the cold wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkaline renewing, so that it becomes a very powerful sharp substance, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation comes from fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among these medicines are some that are cauterized widely, thus quickly and skillfully combined and cause a strong reaction so they may be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	He then recounts an ancient man's operation and cure for the pain of water (possibly hydrocele) and sciatica, marveling greatly at this method, saying that it requires no other treatment, as it heals entirely with a single procedure, strong heating the intricate part in a bath until it is completely healed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it should be done near a certain green plant, and if it is not possible to obtain the green plant, then take a recent fig; many times twist it with a little salt and place it in the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and let it soak.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for as long as the patient's condition allows for relaxation from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in water and when the patient's body is warmed, insert the hot compress into the sole, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that under no circumstances should anyone use these remedies with cautery unless it is for the purpose of cleansing the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the vein in a goat's foot is cauterized with a narrow flame, it benefits the animal; and the cautery should be applied to them according to this method: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry goat's vein and apply it to the flame until it is charred, and place it on the wool, letting the inside expand.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears into the water and the pain is alleviated.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as tension or impact, or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the introduction of foreign, irritating material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not apply to any other type but this specific one, which is caused by the effusion of irritating material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, one prepares pills that resemble them, which are applied on the side where the pain is felt, in three lines according to its extent, and uses cautery on each line as much as necessary, depending on the severity of the malady and the strength of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using the middle claver cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This malady often manifests in young children, and the sign of its onset in children is that their small joints become stiff, evening hindering elevation and motion.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last vertebra of the spine and the nerves that begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you observe this and wish to prevent it, you use a pointed cautery to make a circle in the following shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over all parts of the spine thoroughly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, use the pointed cautery on the circular spine to make two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then carefully tend to the area until it is healed, as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered to a yellowish condition caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated in this manner and the pain does not subside, then the remedy is cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize the immediate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot using fire cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take an olive cautery, whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints and this persists, then cauterize each toe with three or four of these olive cauteries from all sides.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, just sufficiently to target the specific part of the body.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain persists within the toe and its surroundings, then administer the cautery as described in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the feet and it is called gout, then points should be made on the course of the filaments as they turn, on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these, then make points on the course of the filaments around each knot and on the pinch of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can also affect the joints or muscles, then apply cautery to some parts of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the malady without proper treatment and reception of medicines; for if good regimen is followed and the inflammation is drained with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the title or chapter number, rather than a translation.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the angles and the intestines are exposed due to the hernia pushing against the genitals, treatment begins as follows: it is important that the patient fasts on the day of the procedure and uses gentle means to reduce the hernia to prevent it from protruding from the abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then guide the patient between your hands on their back, and instruct them to breathe deeply where the hernia or intestines protrude or are about to emerge.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the intestine to its place and gently attempt to reduce the hernia over the os of the penis, marking the end of the hernial orifice similar to a circle on the upper openings of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And now, light the cautery whose shape is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which there is much heat and inflammation.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand, and apply it straight, focusing on the bone of the toe within the middle of the foot; and repeat that another time if you have not achieved it in the first attempt onto the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the position of the hernia during the cauterization, lest you injure it and cause the hernia or other great malady to return onto the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not interfere with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery on children should be delicate according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And be careful with the site of the cautery for three days, applying hot compresses until the burning sensation subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And be careful with those who have other burns, taking care of them until they heal.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be laid on their back for ten days until the site is sealed and the pain subsides.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that the diet of the patient should be adjusted according to the duration of their recovery, so as not to strain their abdomen, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to effort during healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is deemed fit to remove it after approximately ten days, then administer a suitable treatment, and continue for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should also reduce labor and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when this regimen of healing is followed diligently, complete recovery will follow.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with cauterization of the hernia using a red hot iron, according to its size, and this should be done when the hernia is protruding from the abdominal wall; then apply the care as mentioned earlier, and do not tighten it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some experts have said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this manner, as it is easier to apply and effective.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that they use for the width in the skin above the rupture, and another line on top of it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in other parts of the body is caused by injury or impact and continues for a long time without yielding to treatment with medicines, then it is appropriate to cauterize using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be done on every member according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on it; for usually these pains are punctures in the members closest to it, so you must achieve those with cautery until the illness is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprous people sometimes require cauterization due to severe damage, especially if it is the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is progressive and if it can be cured with what we have mentioned in the previous division, nor does it retract or spread, and fear regarding the disease that corruption might encompass all of the body and all its complexities. Then cauterize it on the head using a cautery: at the middle part of the head, and at the second position beneath it, treat the forehead at the end of the hairs; and both on two horns; and also behind, over the nape or serve accordingly.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, with your hand apply the cautery slightly so that it creates a slight impression on the bone, and dislocates the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is facilitated from it; and cauterize over the poultice as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize those places with those cauteries that we have mentioned above; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and make two cauteries on each eyelid, and make two cauteries on both spines of the neck, and make six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the spines near the coccyx, and one over the scapula, and two on each ankle, and one on each toe, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and cauterize the tendons of their feet; cauterize over all the joints of the hands and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the sole.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be mindful of the nerves that are on the leg, do not irritate those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, cautery is performed with a hot iron on the bone of the thigh, and on another part over the mouth of the stomach, and on another still over the sinew.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its benefit and effectiveness; and also know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, as they do when their wounds are left open, for thus the body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And understand that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints, as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then be careful with the cautery, applying it to the wound with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization (the application of heat) for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stuck or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unsanated, then you cauterize the stuck member with a cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the hot cautery should enter the deep tissue slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that area with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes stupor (numbness) is cauterized in areas such as the hands and feet, the spine, and around the nerves which cause that member to lose sensation, and the numbness is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not attempt to treat this without someone who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the body's members and the exit of nerves throughout the whole body's movement.
Capitol .xlix.	**Capitol .xlix.** (Capitol 49)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of moles that are infected.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When moles are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal applications, then cauterize them with a pointed cautery for a short time according to the quantity of the specific type of cord within, until the white and color of it is reduced, and its color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then prepare a mixture of flour from oats and lentils with warmed oil and arnica leaves, or pigeon dung or owl dung, each in equal parts, and apply it to the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of cracks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the sages say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery on the middle part; but to me, this does not seem right, as I fear it might become an ulcer, and I have seen this a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is much better to cauterize around the hernia in a circle as we have said, or with several cautery points.
Capitol .li.	Capital.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, it may be due to excess moisture, or the state of the illness, as it grows old and weak, with little vitality, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around the hernia with several small punctate cauteries; and apply pressure to it, as it will aid in its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and pause it in the middle place of the thickest part until the thread penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied at that place which is most painful, in order to relieve the pressure on the arm, then take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading decay in the member which corrodes it as if fire were consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place which is to be cauterized with fire, then heat cautery claws, both small and large, as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply a cautery all around until you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then bind it for three days, and apply oil mixed with the cautery marks on the areas cauterized daily, until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then take care of it with a poultice of fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	It may be three days before the meat is completely healed without corruption, which is good; if not, repeat the cautery on what is broken in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated occasionally with sharp medicine, because it takes the place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire may be more beneficial for young people.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already spoken of the cure for him with sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will need from him immediately.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of wounds and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Occasions where cauterization is indicated for the parts around a malady of the foot, which is called a claw, and it's a protrusion, causing pain; and cautery on these takes place in two ways: either with hot fire or with cold water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The hot fire cautery is done by igniting the cautery instrument similar to a bird's quill, made of iron according to the quantity of the claw in all its parts, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply heat to the joint, and carefully turn your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a paste made from wild mallows mixed with salt to the affected area, and leave the paste on for one night so that it purges the root of the issue.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then dress the wound with a ointment of generated flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if these remedies do not help, and painful incidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then apply your cautery with water, taking a small pipe of earth or iron or a needle, and place it over the joint; pour a little water into the pipe, hold your hand, and turn the pipe around with compression from your hand until you feel the water begin to drain out of the base of the joint. Wait for the patient to experience the burning sensation of the water for about an hour, then remove it, as the joint will have released its toxins at that point.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they do to those who have it, bringing all of them together in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then they take care of those pus that the roots of the clots have been eradicated with these ointments which nourish the flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from a painful cause or other similar reason, you must cauterize it with four cautery points or two on each side of the spine, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also cauterize the foot, and over the stomach with olive cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient ceases and hastens the healing of the painful illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of accidental burns on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When burns appear on the body and pustules open up due to corrupt, thick matter, begin by treating them with a pointed cautery or a thin piece of wood, extending its tip over the fire; or shave off the long barbs with a razor; or apply a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	In some cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not hardened, and by removing the excess, they heal those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it may be necessary to perform an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flux of blood from an accidental wound through incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Wounds that exhibit flux from an artery incision must be treated with caution, as this indicates a severe condition or the onset of apoplexy or cauterization of the limb, and it appears difficult to control.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, you must apply all your strength to the horrific wound of the artery, and place your hand over it immediately to stop the flow of blood, until the flux of blood is halted.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply hot olive cauterization to the wounds, both small and large in number, blowing on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then cut from those one small or large according to the location and the affliction in which the artery is ruptured, cauterizing it swiftly over that vein you have previously cleaned, until it is incised and the flow of blood stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood clot is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you remove the cautery and extract it, take another cauterization tool carefully from among those prepared in the fire, and continue doing so until the clot is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to damage the nerves here, as other evils may arise for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the clot in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are burned, the clot is restricted, or by binding or lacing with firm tension, or by applying medicines of which the virtue restricts the clot; and they should be tightened on a cushion at the armpit or groin.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a decent restriction of it with bandages or by reason of burning causes and similar ones, does not bring relief but only pain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open at rest the indicated spot on the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within that the blood flow from the superior part of the plague is stopped, and above the constriction, the said vein is not inflamed; and wash it with cold water of great freshness until the vein is frozen and thickened; and consider if cautery or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incision, piercing, pustules, flebotomy, and plagues, and similar conditions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cauterization is appropriate and medicinal burning, their occasions and causes, and the instruments required for them with the forms of cauterization; I have arranged the chapters on the hierarchy from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter in this manner, so that the desire of anyone who seeks it is fulfilled, when he has asked for it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, know, sons, that in this chapter it is for the fear mentioned in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is in great caution that you should be, for the operation which is in this chapter often causes evacuation of cat's blood, which is precious to life; you must perform the aspersion of veins or incision over the abscess or perception of discharge or purification of the plague or extraction of an arrow or beginning of a stone and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it should not fall on you in whom there is a predisposition, for sometimes you must be aware of the ways of men, as well as the sudden ways of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, some will go to their illness and despite all efforts, they cannot escape death; and this is due to the severity of their illness, and for its prolonged duration, and because it is a terrible illness that means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is those people who, when they come to you, give hope and comfort, expecting health from you; and their illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you with this manner of illness; let your caution be greater than their despair and greed; and do not presume any cause for them except with certain knowledge that verifies what they have come to you with, and to which you have successfully succeeded.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your ailments the knowledge and indication of that which is turned to health, for it assists you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God will inspire your understanding and does not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this distinguished chapter into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cauterization, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you regarding what you ask about and what you will need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Regarding the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that this malady causes complications during childbirth, and when the head of the child emerges, it is necessary to cut the umbilical cord.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes, for hidden causes that are not apparent, it manifests during childbirth.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This malady is often seen only in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work done upon them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head was always thus magnified to such an extent that it could not move due to the size of its head, more so because the humidity increased within until death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the bone and the skin, or it is added beneath the bones upon the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation, if the humidity is between the tendon and bone and the abscess is small, you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a slit in the width, and the length of the slit should be two fingers deep so that the humidity can drain, and this is the shape of the sponge.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there should be two slits according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity has penetrated into the bone, it is a sign that you must fully open the commissures of the head and squeeze the water out when you press with your hand on the openings inside, and this is not something you should withhold.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must make three slits in the middle part of the head according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then remove the incision and dry it; tighten the wounds with drapes and downy fabrics; drill over it with a bore and apply oil within five days, loosen the adhesions and treat the infection with herbs and ointments, tighten the head in equality; and feed the patient dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision that considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do it as best as you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery and try to make flows of blood and pus from the malady through that flow of pus with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter .ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries, which are close to the auricles, called velaries.
Capitol segon.	**Second Chapter**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an event or injury to the ears or feet, and it is old and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so when you want to incise those that the patient's illness has formed as its head, rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible, and then tighten the patient's collar with some cloth; consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each over the places that are close to the auricles gradually become obscured, especially in certain people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a clamp on the artery at the site of the cut, incise each one with a scalpel, making sure to reach within the bone, and do this according to the size of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula between the artery and cut it at the point of its attachment to the partitions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers, because when any vein is incised, the blood tends to escape pulsatively, which can quickly become excessive.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the bandage, then you must measure from the edge the quantity of three fingers, and carefully cut through the tent, and insert it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood drawn from the vein should be about a wine unc., and it must never be more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the strength of the patient's condition and the extent of the artery's retraction.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the pain, then cut it through so that it does not lead to gangrene cautely.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a strong compression with feathers and linen cloth to it, and take care of the wound until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	**Capitol III.**
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or acute migraines occur due to seasonal humidity and the state of the membranes in the temples, or sudden old age resembling these, and it does not yield to medical treatments such as those mentioned here, then we resort to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is to target the ailments that reside in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple where it is indicated by its pulsation, and it is concealed from most people due to its severity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is concealed, then tighten the collar of the ailment with a cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears visibly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the sponge that has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the thread with your fingers as easily as possible to reach the arrowhead; and then you open it where it is located and extract the arrowhead from its free parts while you remove the thread from the tunic that is left behind, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you wrap it around the end of the finger, and then cut a single part according to the amount by which the ends are extended and contracted, and if they are not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then empty the vein of blood, three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arrowhead is large, then you cover it with two pieces of cloth or strong cord, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and make sure blood flows.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone; cauterize the ends of it after they have been incised, and hold in place that piece of work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or there is a combination of heat; for cauterization is one of the remedies that aid in drying humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the bones that have moved from their place, and they should be placed over it properly, and after that, use dry medicines to make the flesh and the joints heal until it is cured.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another complication arises in the form of bleeding from the bone, then you must restrict that blood, either with cauterization or what you place over the joint, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present, then apply your finger over the area until the swelling subsides, and wash the place with water of strong coldness until the pain ceases, and tighten it according to need.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more commonly removed from an arrow wound is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, after you have cleaned both places, and then apply some fire, until they reach the bone and sever the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it can be elongated, as it is not solidified by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both blades is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But it may still be better with just one blade, as if it is sharper than two, it can cut through flesh more easily and quickly without severing the vein.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of fire is retained in that area and the flesh is severed slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and is most delicate.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two joints is determined by the thickness of that.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic eye pain.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acute eye pains, and it is the veins just above the orbit of the eye that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition can be determined, and the patient's face becomes discolored and he experiences a sensation in his forehead similar to that of walking on ants, and the eyes of the patient are exhausted, moistened to the point where their lids become loose, and the eyelids are chafed by the intensity of the tears, the ancient remedies used for the treatment of such conditions in this procedure are as follows: it is called a gentle cure.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally distant according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small portion of the skin where the tears are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be mindful of the incision of the arteries which are in two cuts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth handy, squeeze it to extract the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife with its two sharp points, which is the form of the incision for it.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the ciphas, which is over the bone, and then make this from the middle incision during the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then take this knife and insert it into the first incision again with another tool called a cuttle, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp edge of this tool against the flesh attached to the tendon, and the blunt edge against the bone, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appears from the coccyx, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the san (vein or artery).
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure some cold oil or vinegar and wine, and apply it over the places that are infected with pus, ensuring not to cause further infection with the cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large enema of lukewarm water or herbal tea, and then apply to it basilicum (or rose oil) and other herbs until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	(The end)
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding through catharsis and the descent of humors from parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute catharsis occurs and continues, the patient's wounds become exhausted, their eyelids are ulcerated along with their eyelashes, and in the region of the head there is severe pain accompanied by subsequent discharge, at this point it becomes clear to those knowledgeable about these accidents that the materials and catharsis do not come from outside but rather from veins within parts inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to wipe their forehead, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead just above the bone (and begin at the incision in the left temporal bone and extend it to the right temporal bone; and cut through the bone; and with your hand remove the lacerations on the temples that are most painful after mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, then fill the space between the two lips of the wound with cotton wool or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply fresh, clean powder over the wound to prevent it from becoming infected.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have dressed it and seen that the infection has decreased, then you should know that the inflammation begins in the bone inside them, and so treat it with a drying regimen as if you were taking two parts of flour and four parts of colchicum, mix them together to make a poultice, and apply it to these wounds, both on new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that create heat in the ears are one of four types: either a mineral or something similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or from plants, such as peas or beans, or fluid-related, such as water and wine, or something resembling them, or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone or any other cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear creates heat, and the ear is exposed to the sun, and if the stone is broken, it distills into some cause of foul oil or pus, then promptly administer its extraction, and do as conditions dictate for the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some soft cloth or wool around the ear canal, and extend the ear away from the source of these causes, as moving away from them helps alleviate these conditions.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a delicate epichirurgical gear, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if a wound has been forgotten, it is well; otherwise, administer the extraction of the hernia from where it protrudes with gentle pressure.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten, make a catheter of thread and insert the tip of the catheter into the ear canal, then close around the catheter with wax and softened oil so that only the catheter is opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract the small intestine with strong traction, as we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this method is not forgotten, take a hot lamp or some other heated appliance with which the outside of the limb is gently warmed, and pause at the point of pain, then wrap it decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal easily, and remove the ear from any moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then cut away the part that causes the abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting away that part is that you begin by cauterizing the infected vein and extracting the pus according to the nature of its strength, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the edge of the wound towards the parts above, and make a small slit in the base of the tongue where the pus has gathered.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the slit should be made in such a way that it reaches the bone, and if the bone is exposed, stop there if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the slit, and treat it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the pain in the ear is an inflamed and swollen grease, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not obey your own observation, then take a small and delicate spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the removal of that great thing which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this if you think that the thing is already moistened by the ear's vapor and becomes hard, then place it in a heated mass, or extract it with incisions or subtle gestures, as we have said, for this facilitates its extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In water which has entered the ear, use the patient's sneezing to determine the beginning, and fill the ear with as much wool or some other soft substance as possible. Then pour hot stones over that ear, and if the water is discharged through it, it is good; otherwise, take two smooth pebbles according to their length, warm them slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of them into the opening of his ear and leap on it with all his might, striking another pebble against the one inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, continue applying pressure until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been completely expelled, take some paper or cloth and place one end of it in the armpit and extend the other end over the fire until the whole length is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then take another cloth and do this several times until all the water is expelled, and remove the catheter as is usually done with the extracting pear.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body entering that armpit, if it is small and similar to a pear, it should be treated as we have said in the previous section; however, if it is a large object causing an appearance at the site of the wound, then administer the extraction with gestures and incisions, and the cause of it is a pus infection from all other causes that affect the armpit.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	During the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat that which we have mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distills, and do not follow through with your care, then you must protect the ear from the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that worm or use subtle gestures, but if no cause is apparent, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other whose shape is like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the malady; then suck with a strong suction and do this in turns until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not adhere to the above instructions, then compress and seal the canal of the tube with wax as we have said; administer distills which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the section on distills.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your flow be the one that pours medicinal oils onto the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make one of silver or bronze, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and smooth its surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore, it should be used where it is in the cavity of the container here, it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the instrument neatly, then pour oil into the concave part of the hearing aid, or juice from some herb, or any medicine you prefer for this treatment—into the canula, which is in the ear—and then insert the ray into the cutout on top and press with your hand to expel the oil into the concave part of the hearing aid, while the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should be already scarified with fire at a small point.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you extract from the ear is not too damaged, because the ear medications do not withstand this.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII**
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	**On the Treatment of Ear Inflammation**
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children's bellies can become inflamed without perforation, and this also happens in some adults, either from inflammation of the ear tissue due to illness or from an injury; and this inflammation sometimes occurs at the point of the ear piercing that is not noticed, or it can be outside the ear.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that occurs at the piercing point, which is not noticed, is in the most difficult situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you have achieved the incision, take care to place the patient's thigh on the sun (or light) and observe it carefully.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you notice an accumulation (or swelling), open that thin blade from which this form extends.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of the blade where the width is narrow, with one side sharp and the other not; and the blade is of two lengths so as not to cut into the thigh.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to flesh in the thigh or its muscle, then take those fine scissors and make an incision there gently so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the groin area, take a fine blade and heat it slightly with fire, then insert that into the flesh of the groin.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you feel an increase in this condition that the disease attacks and facilitates by its gravity, exert pressure on it to facilitate; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a bandage to the ear according to the amount of space between the folds, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the wound; or take some and immerse it in water and sprinkle over it after every third day, and use it; if the ear has already become infected, be careful not to pour the liquid and replace it with another liquid that you wrap in a bandage made from oil that is smooth, as long as the abscess cauterization yields; and then tend to that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is an occurrence of pus discharge, then immerse a clean cloth or drape in hot water and apply it to the ear, using other healing methods that you have mentioned in the distillation treatment.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of atherosclerosis that affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atherosclerosis that affects the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are moist, other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have these tools or pliers at hand, and remove this plaque from its roots, and then place your finger over the incised areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is severe pain due to the flow of blood, then you cauterize these with a delicate antilptic cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and close them when there is no further cause for their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Occasional appearances on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some matter that resembles a large and firm mass, hence it is called grandiose.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is characterized by the addition of thick moisture on both the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them considers, when the grandiose is proceeding from the matter appearing from the eyelid and is reduced completely; and the cause of it is trivial.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open along that fissure with a lance, and extract it completely with ease, and then suspend the one attached and sever it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the beginning of the hernia is not apparent to you, but it penetrates the eyelid slightly with incision, then it will not be noticed for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the hernia is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer greatly because the hernia's pain is restored and incorporated.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the hernia's size is decreasing within the eyelid, you must examine the surface within, then raise the eyelid and suspend the hernia with a bandage, other than what you need for the initial opening, and press on it from all sides; and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, it will not be noticed for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then open the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area with what has been incorporated until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of an abscess on the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	An abscess is an inflammation of the tissues under the upper eyelid, which often occurs in childhood and can lead to the closure of the eyes, preventing them from opening fully due to excessive tearing.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you will have to apply these remedies to their faces day and night, and as a result, the eyebrows over their eyelids will become moist, covering the swelling and the imminent discharge becoming apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the accumulation within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one way of operation is to have the patient lie on their back with their head raised and wrapped in a cloth, applying heat and making them circular according to the quantity they contain, taking care not to add too much pressure so as not to cause additional damage; then place that over the affected area and press gently with your fingers throughout, so that the discharge is collected in the middle of the circle, and stop when the middle of the affected area becomes moist from the heat and the application of sputum.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Insert the probe into the wound completely until you reach the cavity, for in the most advanced cases, the cavity is reached through an opening according to the form of the white granuloma.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those cloths which you have wrapped around the parts outside and turn them inside out with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to tighten the wound so that the spatula does not reach the other side and tear it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then tighten the fissure a little more gently until the process begins; and then remove those cloths as we have said, and immerse them in water and wine and place them over the area and sprinkle those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so, they squeeze salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture evaporates.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attend to that which needs to be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an injury occurs at the posthemous site, then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	**Chapter XI.**
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the ways of touch therapy.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are formed by unnatural growths and are ancient, these our enemies towards the eye cause various maladies, such as frequent tears, softening of the eyelids and tissue, until it becomes the cause of the destruction of the eye, which is called 'tactile damage to the eye', and its cure is in four ways: either with a cautery using fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or with canning, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so take care that you place the head of the patient in a vertical position; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; but if not, insert an needle into that part where the fold of the eyelid meets, and let the needle pass through the fold, close to the edge where the hairs are, and pull the thread away from the eyelid towards its root.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then open the space within the eyelid, removing the hairs with a precise scalpel; then extract the thread and place it under the eyelid using small cotton or linen threads, and secure it firmly with a bandage, keeping the eyelid in its original position, like a young shoot of a plant.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, take care that it is in the form of elevation of the eyelid; for this varies among men, as those with greater elevation of the eyelid require a deeper incision to soften the eyelid.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut open the space between the two lines you have marked, starting from the lacrimal gland major to the lacrimal gland minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fracture is near the natural hairs, it should also be as thick as the king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the lion's claw in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it thoroughly, and adjust the suture with silk thread or fine wool, clean the pus, and make what is superfluous of the cloth adhere to the two eyebrows for some reason entangled, if you want to do so, otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then change the suture of the cloth every three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plague open for its suture, and treat it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; a tighter suture is better. Therefore, I tell you the ancient practices of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, be diligent in your care of the patient, as it is a good operation and there is no cause for fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxation, which involves noting the shape on the eyelid resembling a myrtle leaf, and then raising the eyelid with three precise cuts, separating and gathering it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, then have the cuts made, and this should not be neglected; take a needle with a thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, then pass another needle close to the lacrimal nerve, and the third one slightly farther away from it; adjust between these two threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand at an equal angle as you did before, raising all the eyelid on which the shape is drawn.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is sane.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs after your incision or wound, treat it with cheese and similar materials, and apply heat to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, it happens that the patient's hair turns white on their eyelids, so use what we have mentioned about incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some instances.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To insert a cane, do it in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the form within, as I have mentioned; then, with art, insert two canes or two thin splints whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and whose width matches the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each piece where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Nearby, add any subtleties to what is superfluous on the eyelid, and constrict the canals of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the inflammation due to tightness will die and become negated, and it will fall off by itself until it gradually dissolves.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two canals according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the amount of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About the elevation of sharp pimples on the skin with an agule when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp pimples in the skin, the operation on them involves taking a subtle needle and pricking that delicate thread of silk, and then adjusting the ends of it very carefully and subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be about the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another delicate thread beneath it shortly, and adjust the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head in a small bed, close to the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a delicate and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it with skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair from its root and insert that in the ointment, taking care that it is one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then gently pull your hand away from the hair once it is completely freed from the ointment on the eyelid and its natural growth.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the ointment is not pulled out with the hair and it remains attached to the eyelid, pull the ointment off in the same manner that you applied it, so that the ointment comes out from above the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then you will have the sight of the wound, when you remove the ointment and the bandage, and wash the wound with water, and close it with a bandage for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and the skin grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is very short, then you should adjust a longer natural hair and lift it to that which you observe as being elongated appropriately in space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you observe a condition on the eyelid, and it is contracted when closed, to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, and it is called leukoma, this inflammation or is natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the folds of the eyelid, and place in it what is between them a piece of lint cloth, and bind them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out, restrict; for if you do so, it will only make the condition worse and there will never be a cure.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use those causes that soften, as fennel does, and steep them in hot water with the seeds, or in vinegar, which is liquified with any of the oils, and immerse the affected area in it, and treat it thus.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce with a sharp instrument any part that is not consolidated according to its original form, as you saw at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we spoke of is nothing but a correction of the deviation that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the care of the eye, which is done on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This care, which is done on the eyelid and is often called "alxacrati," is not properly called "alxacrati"; it is either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental alxacrati may be caused by a plague, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh apart with the needle and cut with a scalpel, making an ample incision.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the shape of the eyelid according to what it covers, as it should be; if not, take a string and hold that in the split shape, then turn the eyelid around, and make both slits on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both slits should be at two angles from the incision you have made, where they meet, and so formed that when they converge, their shape is evident.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this shape is the Greek letter lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then press the flesh with your finger that is as thin as the eyelid has left space.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and attach them with a thread; and care for those with what we have said about softening medicines and applications of heat, so that it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase the opening by incision or suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the calculus between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the final stages of the surgical procedure when it is elevated or left open, the flow of operations should follow according to the preparation for the operation in the form of incisions, and that one is in the form of various spots of diversity.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare tricks in every way possible so that within him it returns the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats that malady according to what suits the operation and the tools in their best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, it seems to be solidified, making the eyelid less flexible and hindering its natural movements; therefore, you should insert a thin instrument under the eyelid's edge, raise it up, or stretch it gently towards the nose.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should incise the adhesion with a thin instrument that is not sharp enough to cause further irritation, making it slightly blunt so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not damage the eye's sensitivity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made in such a way that it frees the adhesion while allowing the eyelid to return to its natural shape, and ensuring that all traces of the adhesion are healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you immerse it in warm, salty water or distill sun-heated vinegar into it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then you separate the eyelid from the globe with warm, salty water, place over the eye a compress of wool infused in egg white, and apply the third day treatments that promote healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the knowledge of the cause and prominence of the tear gland's flesh.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the tear gland is of two manners: either it is nervous, resembling a subtle hard bone; or it is non-nervous, resembling white ice water, which when pricked, is easily separated and the point does not remain in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until the larger lacrimal canal narrows gradually, covering the vision and blocking light and motion.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating in the incision of the eye is that the patient's head is placed under the knife, their eyelids are opened, and with one hand the upper eyelid is lifted, then the fingernail is used to make a small cut (or slit) on the surface of the eye and extend it towards the sides.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the eye using a horsehair, or goat hair, or cow hair, or similar, slowly extending the needle tip and placing it in the middle of the pupil, then piercing the eye with the needle, tying the eyelash to the needle; extend it towards the sides, and remove the hair from the surface of the eye which blocks the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you also remove the hair within the back of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then, you incise the lower edge of the eyelid with a thin spatula or small scissors, and you open the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by incision of this one does not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some also use an oil or balm, as we have said, and then with a thin spatula, they apply it in the form of this one.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, put a little salt or a fine cloth on it and leave it for another day; and then take care of it until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it stuck in those places, then look for this type of eyelid being cured with medicines, and thus it is healed as well.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to dissect it, open the wound of the patient and take delicate spatules with sharp points according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with delicacy
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it becomes stiff and resistant in that incision, slowly extract it from the wound using a clean, sharp tool or a clean needle, and close the wound within the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation until everything that is foreign to it is completely removed, otherwise a foul wound will form in the incision, for if you leave it, the infection will spread until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that wound until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The intensity of the tear gland's secretions, if noticed in a significant amount, should be suspended immediately; cut off one portion at a time, and do not close the incision to prevent the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill the main tear duct carefully, making sure it heals properly.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and what arises from flesh attached to the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of certain individuals, infected flesh arises, and it is so swollen that it covers the pupil, or it protrudes closely towards the eyelids and strongly pulls the eyelids away from each other, and it is assembled like a castle of cards.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The surgical procedure involves that the patient holds their side; then open the wound of that area and gather all the flesh with suitable scissors, and to this attach a forceps or basket; then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful of the wound so as not to damage your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be the one that incises those or scrapes off the debris we have removed during the operation of the ungla, or small forceps that are gathered carefully according to the shape it takes as this chapter approaches.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle it with powdered rogues similar to corrosive medicines, and place a warm compress over it with cotton until it is assured of no infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for concern and the wound becomes infected, and you fear an abscess, leave the wound and treat that abscess with what works to heal that abscess, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, and in this way care for the flesh that has been affected by the wound of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Nevertheless, you should be aware that any cure for a painful joint should be done with care, either through natural or accidental means, by skilled hands, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the affected member is able to withstand that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	**On the Collection of Knowledge in Disease**
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are difficult to comprehend and seem locked away like turtles in their shells regarding disease. These complex issues should not be rushed into operation without proper understanding, for such hasty actions may prolong the illness for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is essential that you consider whether the knowledge in question is strong and if there are no other illnesses present that also possess that knowledge—it is then that you should gather that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And make the patient hold their head in your hands, and suspend those veins with a needle or two according to your discretion; and let that needle have a thin, double fold according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two needles gradually inserted according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gently collect those veins with subtle forces, in subtlety, and immediately wash the wound as soon as you see those veins filled with blood and turned red.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to hurt the wound at the ends of the knife; and if you perform your operation in the morning facing the sun, and are strong in your action, only pierce those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, pour distilled vinegar or rosewater into the wound to corrode what is left from the needle.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to collect all of these things at that hour, then apply a plaster to the area where the pain is and leave it for a few days until the pain is relieved and the risk of infection has passed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process according to the patient's condition until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method for forks:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing enlarged noses.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating enlarged noses with cautery or sharp medicines, as described in the preceding narrative, and if it is not healed, do not attempt to close it until the abscess has matured, and extract all the pus that is within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and appears corrupted or black, you cut it with a tool that has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp knife, and it should be made to cut, and the head should also be rounded so that it can be punctured with a needle or with fine scraping (just as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This should be done several times, and then the place is restored with drying and stopping agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh and the body is separated from the sanies and pain for forty days, and it is not renewed or inflamed and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it cannot be brought back into place except by narrowing the fissure to its natural shape, then do so in this manner: uncover according to the bone or acute medication, and as soon as the bone is uncovered, take hold in this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should first be extended to the tip in this way as it turns.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, and that should be the location of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand over the bone until it penetrates completely through the bone, and you will feel the pain as air escapes from within.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you will restore the area using hemostatic medications that dry out as required.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh is no longer inflamed at the site, the matter that was discharged from the openings returns to the body, so this is less concerning regarding the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of hernias.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and does not yield to gentle pressure or decrease in size, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then continue with the treatment, making incisions in the neck for proper drainage and applying a liniment made of alder and aloe leaves, herbs, and sarcolla, and then firmly secure the bandage over the hernia using powdered motz.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the powders is to take linen cloth from the coarse moss, and each cloth is folded in four parts; and make those mosses.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then arrange them one on top of the other according to the amount required for the hernia.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply a strong, firm pressure to those parts with the aid of a rigid, well-tightened bandage; and repeat the suction with the scarification; and remove the bandages and leave the wounds clean during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And likewise, rest the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, well, that is good; otherwise, repeat the application of poultices with powders and compression and suction until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the tunic's eminence (uvae).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the uvular tunic, and it protrudes and processes the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, and the shape of a man is formed by this, and you wish to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have previously mentioned, so that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvula at the point where it has come out from its place above, and then insert another needle through which the double thread of the lacrimal part passes, and cause it to penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uvula along the path of the needle, and tighten that muscle.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on the humid wool soaked in chicken albumen, and wait until the thread falls off the uvula.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then dress the wound with that which will soothe it until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it is gathered from all parts around the wound with a great emphasis on adjusting the bandage tightly, and then it is perforated with a thin spatula that comes to the surface of the wound, and allows the albumen moisture to escape, and the bandage is then lowered and applied quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then apply heat until it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De curacio de alconati.	**On the Cure of Alconati**
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady, called alconati, is nothing but a health condition that presents as a swelling resembling water flowing downward, and it is not the same as gout.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treatment is as follows: grasp the affected area firmly on both sides and right above it; then take hold of the head in your hands from two different directions, and press until you feel the swelling move away from the joints, prevent it from descending, and stop the pain; thus, the disease will disappear in due time.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to the bedpan has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient stop between your legs and take a delicate spatum and remove that over the panniculus, just in front of the continuation of the conjunctiva (within the desired location), until the sanie is emptied.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once the sanie is emptied, you should then distill the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be cared for regarding the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII.**
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	**On the treatment of water coming from the feet.**
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in its divisions, and it is fitting to perforate on the tongue as declared, according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now hold the patient still between your thighs on a couch, tie their hands, and make them shiver with cold.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the patient's left eyelid if the affected eye is the left one; or your right hand near their right eyelid if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then hold your right hand, if the affected eye is on the left; or your left hand, if it is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then grasp the tip of the thumb near the corner for the thickness of the tear in the patient's eye, and gently pull the thumb towards you while rotating your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then press into the eye socket, and feel that the thumb has already reached the back due to the pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the path of the almond to the pupil with the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, and it is the rim of the eye; for you will see that pupil through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then press the almond into the area where there is water, and release it downward a few times, and as soon as the water descends, you will feel the malady on which its sight was previously fixed, and the almond in its eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will relax that other time before the almond is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is dried and does not descend, then extract the almond easily, and turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from a gem, and wash inside the eye with that lave; and then pull out the eye lid or stop or wool infused in rose oil and albumen of egg and apply it to the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we and those of our time place ourselves over this treatment as it has been described in books.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not adhere to your knowledge when using the tool on the hernia, because the hernia is hard for some people—of whom many suffer from this condition—then you should take the sponge, which is called a "ball" and has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore, perforate this joint, do not release your hand from the tool, and do not stop until you have made a subtle opening in your knowledge.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then, insert the tool according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your task, prepared for the patient's sleeping place to be made comfortably in a dark room where they sleep on their back at home, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And hold it in place according to its nature so that it is cleared of its impurities, and do not twist its head towards the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the bandage should be according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then carefully open that in this dark manner, and examine the foul sight, and discover some causes, and return the bandage within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover this during the time of treatments or perhaps, immediately apply the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is known that you remove this because the water can slightly evaporate due to great and violent heat of regardment.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs after cauterization, then open the wound again on the seventh day, and straighten out that which has deviated due to the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now, let's translate line by line:
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually and carefully examine the patient and discuss its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in surgery, the pupil of the eye is not to be avoided at all times, and then you will be daring with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already mastered some of those who are under the art, and one says that fire should be made in the air with a tube through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Yet perhaps you have not seen this perfectly in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it may be a novelty.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices that serve for those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the acute end also like that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	**Chapter XXIV**
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there appear various attached flesh injuries, whose cause is sometimes due to a swelling of the mucous membranes, or to polyps; this illness is called polyps because it resembles that particular foot (or rather, growth) represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, pale, of dark color; and from it comes the lion's flesh, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you should open the wound between your fingers and place it in the sun, wash the nose of it, and apply honey to those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and cut what you have understood of them with a delicate knife between the parts, knowing that all the flesh is held; if any cause remains of which the dissection is possible, then quickly take hold of it with one of the subtle instruments as an aid.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it is a benign or acute apthous ulcer, then apply to it what covers it; but if it is a malignant abscess, then cut and cauterize that part until the san is completely removed and all cavities are healed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then carefully insert into the nose, the incision tool, and use either water or oil.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is blocked and you feel humidity in the palate during the process, then know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then know that inside there is flesh full of pus between the bones of the nose to which the dissection has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should then insert the instrument into whoever has any obstruction, and move it around gently, and between each joint apply the amount of force necessary, and manipulate the illness, and insert one end of the instrument into the naris either by force or for other reasons possible to them.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And moreover, when this is done, it should be held so that its smell enters the nasal canals and settles on their soft parts, for several times witnessed, these actions make children in schools sneeze, and it is a minor cause to anyone who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the instrument: one end should protrude from the nose and the other should be inserted into the naris, and apply pressure on the flesh with the fingers that are around the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh is already around the instrument's edges.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the instrument and place a warm compress on the nose for three days or more until the swelling has completely dissolved what is broken in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If treatment comes to an end, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the design of the instrument, called an alchemist, which distills oils and medicines from herbs:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small lamp with an open top, having a small cavity, and a handle that resembles it.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube as well, with a handle, and the tube of the alchemist's instrument should be flat and open; to which you should have access when you dig into it with oil or water that you want from the succeded causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these herbs are precious: take of castor, white willow, ginger, and saffron piletre, long pepper, henna, and epithym (spice) in a wine mixture with honey and make pills, and administer one pill with hot water to the afflicted parts.
Capitol .xxv.	It appears that your request is incomplete or lacks context. The text "Capitol .xxv." does not provide enough information for me to discern the language or content it refers to. If this is part of a document you'd like translated, please supply more context or the full text for better assistance.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow on the tips of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Frequent occurrences are noticed as a growth on the tips of the nose, which becomes enlarged and noticeable within a few days, requiring medical attention.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should pay attention at the onset of its appearance and eradicate it completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is located in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the operation takes too long, it should be suspended, and consider whether it is inflamed, hard, of a dark color, and lacks sensation; in this case, do not touch that part with a hot iron as it is a sign of gangrene; for signs of danger indicate that one should retreat from this wound due to its great malice towards the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is tender and not dark in color, and it is possible to operate on it anywhere, then empty the pus and cut through the affected area without fear, and treat the place with a liquid that will heal and tighten until it is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to an ulcer or similar condition.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, it causes little trouble to those operations except in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you detect any cause among those, considering it a fresh plague or its pus, then adjust the two edges of the plague with stitches and, afterwards, take care of the inside so that it heals properly.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the rupture are already separated and each is healthy, then you should remove each piece from its connection ensuring that no pus escapes.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then, adjust the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them and cover them with fine plaster or any other consolidative dressing, leave it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the dressing, leaving it until the wounds heal by themselves, and take care with ointment so that they heal properly.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique of sewing is that you add the solution for continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with silk as you have been taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII**
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the removal of those causes that come in both lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	You will often see these growths in many people inside their lips; some are hard like dry flesh, resembling the hardness of erysipelas, and others are better or larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should open the lips and remove each of those hard growths from every part, and then fill the place with a clean stitch while that wound is restrained, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the place with water that has been mixed with salt, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of tissue attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Cut carefully over the attached gum tissue, which the ancients called 'albus', then either suspend it or hold it with forceps and cut it away, allowing the blood to flow or the pus to drain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply over the area a sage compress or other astringent or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the tissue returns, cut it again secondarily and cauterize it, for near certain the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Because of the tooth's root.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of teeth within jaws and between gums there are tight, rough, scaly edges, sometimes blackened, and these are caused by corrosion through the gum tissue, then the adjacent teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you should remove the patient's discomfort between their thighs and rest their head on a pillow, and clean the teeth where these rough edges and similar debris appear, so that no further cause of pain arises, and this removes the blackness, yellowing, and other conditions as they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if it is left as it is in the beginning of the rational treatment, well and good; otherwise, you should repeat the treatment on these parts for several days, second and third, until you reach the final statement regarding what you wish to achieve.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various types of precise cuts and shapes depending on how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For this reason, the scissors with which the tooth is separated from within are different from those used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of scissors must be prepared for you as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take your time in its complete eradication, for there is no cause to replace it once it has been extracted, as it is a sublime substance whose absence justifies the difficulty of its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain can sometimes deceive and lead one to believe it comes from a healthy tooth; therefore, extract that tooth, and the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, to determine which tooth is painful, and as you already know, you must cut into the gum around the tooth using a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is completely detached from the tooth, and then carefully use your fingers or fine forceps, starting at the root, bit by bit, until the pain ceases.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use pliers with strong teeth for good speech or firm extraction; hold the patient's head between your hands that they do not move; and treat the tooth according to its straightness so as not to break it or cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it into the affected area with ease and effort to remove it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then know that you must cover it with cloth and twist the fragment with a thin thread so that it does not come loose during your constriction over those areas where it holds.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification precisely around the entire gum line and take care not to break or tear that part, then return to the patient for further treatment, as the pain may be greater than the first time.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless attempts at removal, for they do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, time after time they bring about great hardships for men, whose roots are so deeply embedded that it is much more difficult to extract them. And we have witnessed this on numerous occasions, where, after much effort, only some of the teeth or even just a few bones from the jaw remain.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with wine or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are pus and swelling, then cut off some amount of it and sprinkle on the affected area; if this does not help, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be subtle, with a long and thin end, a short handle, and a thick base, so that they do not bend when used for such delicate tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And similarly, when the handles have thick ends, they should be short in length; when you first use them, they should not bend.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	These are made of Indian iron with straight ends, and on the ends of those are teeth that fit into each other and tighten strongly when pressed together; sometimes, the ends of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak, which is curved and very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When it is necessary to eradicate a tooth that is impacted for some reason, you should place your hand over the area with a bordered edge for one or two days until the area is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanta.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be done inside with a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey this instruction with these pliers or tongs, then you should press down on the root and expose all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but sharp instrument, small in length, so that it is not bent.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the treatment for this is overlooked, it is useless; otherwise, assist me with these other instruments, of which these are examples: the shape of the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now assist with this instrument, which has two slopes; the appropriate shape is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that are used for tooth extraction; since it is delicate work, use this instrument which resembles a large claw, and its shape is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may have some thickness, but is not covered so as not to be squeezed.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments with many teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans, by observing the symptoms and various ailments, can determine what treatment is required; for there are ailments to which the ancients did not give attention or apply their specific instruments due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are squeezed, then apply gentle pressure at that point according to what is suitable for these instruments and the forceps used in extracting teeth, and aid yourself with the gesture which this shape demands.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small defect, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that it does not escape or rupture until the bone of all is completely healed; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, quickly remove the dirt and darkness from that hole and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth that stand out among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth stand out abnormally from their natural position, especially in women and more so in the most sacred parts, one must consider: if it is not possible to extract or heal the tooth, then it should be uprooted; rather than being attached to another tooth, one should cut it with a surgical instrument that resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp steel from India.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made over the tooth in several days due to the tooth's hardness, and it should not affect any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to caries, then you should file it with a steel file from India that has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of this is made of Indian iron and the edge is precisely; it has small points as if with a lime, each one sharpened little by little over several days easily, so that there are no other teeth broken or falling off.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then prepare the thread at the end, and sharpen those with other razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is the tooth from which a piece has broken off and affects the tongue, you must then file the edge of that fraction until its roughness becomes smooth and stopped, and apply it so that neither the tongue is hurt nor the word is corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Capitol .xxxiii.** (Note: "Capitol" is likely referring to the chapter title, with xxxiii indicating Chapter 33)
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by severe impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot bear the pain, having tried various stricture-inducing medications without success, then it is necessary to resort to those that are tightened with gold wire, not silver, because silver becomes weak and cannot be relied upon for long-term use.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness as to fit between the teeth; the shape of the clasp is that you take the wire and hold it twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then twist the wire in a serpentine fashion between the two damaged teeth, or if only one remains, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, tightening your hold with facility and wisdom, lest it be damaged again.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your tightness with which you tighten the wire should be such that it does not dislodge the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then carefully cut off the surplus filament with forceps or scissors, and place them in any desired position by manipulation, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so as not to harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then fasten that quite tightly with a Roman bandage.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes separated or torn, strengthen that or those with another thread in the same manner for as long as necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the correction for two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thus binding these together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their proper place in each location and have grown again as we have rectified them, they will be stronger.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is only done by skilled artisans and wise men.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is caused by a bone from a cow, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the same place where the tooth was missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	**Chapter XXXIV**
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found in the tongue sometimes exists naturally or accidentally due to a condition that has already set in.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, so that its lower part exists in the sky; and he raises his tongue, and then cuts into that nervous ligament according to its extent until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any stiffness or resistance in that area, and it has formed due to the consolidation of an illness, then you apply oil and cut through it according to its extent so that you can incise the ligament and dissolve the nodule.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause any rupture in the muscle of the flesh, and cut through the rearward attachment, and let come a flow of pus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then clean the traces of the incision with water or wine or rubbing alcohol; and place your hand over the opening; it is necessary that the patient keeps their tongue outside during these nights so that it does not become consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus comes out, apply vitriol over the area; if the pus is smelling bad, cauterize the area with a poisonous cautery that suits it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then address the other causes within that it be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section, "Capitol .xxxv.", but without the actual content or context of what is being referred to. To provide a meaningful translation or analysis, I would need the text itself.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Remove the ranula with the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an accident occurs where the tongue becomes paralyzed, resembling a small, rigid block, preventing its natural movements; and its extreme hardness is greatly magnified within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth wide, facing the sun, and consider the paralysis.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a pale or dark, hard color, by which the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that part as it is brittle.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white, in which there is moisture, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, and cut it apart; and if the bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then hold pressure with three bandages, preferably made of vitriol, as long as the bleeding is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have thoroughly cleaned it with water and salt; and attend to the other treatment for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Chapter .XXXVI.**
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles, and those that occur in the throat, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a throat infection occurs, there are glands that swell up, which protrude outside and are called two auricles. When you treat this as we have mentioned in the previous section and it does not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a foul color and the base is thick, do not touch it with a knife due to the risk of infection; instead, leave it until it has naturally matured, and either you will extract it or it will break off by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radiant, and its texture is delicate, then that one needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure for it is that you consider, in relation to your operation, whether the abscess has rested after being cauterized completely or if it has diminished to some extent; and then stop the malady facing the sun, place its head in a low position, open its mouth, and have the servant press gently between their teeth the tongue, using an instrument of noble form, which is as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or bronze, and be sharp with a delicate blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So, when you press the tongue against that and show the abscess to your patient, then take this sharp instrument and place it into the opening, and pull it out as far as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then cut with an instrument whose shape this is:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, however, the ends of it are curved, so that the points of each of those are in the right angle of the other, very sharp, made of iron then coated.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available, then cut with a spatula whose shape is like this: And it should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut a wound, cut the other according to this same manner of cutting, and then close the incision with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of pus, cleanse with water from the decoction of fennel or mint leaves and similar things until the flow of pus is stopped, and then treat it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, if other remedies fail, or if both ears are affected, incise them as you have seen and said in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman for an abscess that was located in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dusky color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman was breathing with great difficulty, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she was close to death if more time passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already caused so much pain that it had opened two ruptures through which pus was oozing.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So, you should listen to me carefully and follow these steps: first, open the abscess surgically and remove the pus; then place a bandage over it; afterward, apply pressure to the area from which the pus originated; next, make an incision where you suspect the other wound is located, and press on it; then seize their tongue to prevent them from swallowing; finally, keep the wound in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut out a large part of it, and there flows little blood from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, it is essential to treat that woman immediately, and she should begin drinking water, and soon after, consume food. Thus, you must not delay making incisions on those inflamed spots again for a long time, but rather succeed in each subsequent location, which helps prolong the treatment.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply and cauterize the ulcer of the patient, thus adding to it; then you must walk around and not clean what God has done for that particular case.
Capitol .xxxvii.	**Capital .XXXVII.** (Note: The lack of context and the use of Roman numerals suggest this is a section title or part of an index)
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the hernia when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is inflamed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the pharynx it is thick and round, and it is then called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If treatment is as we have described above, and your physician does not agree with this method, and indeed, it has already been tried several times with cautery, but the hernia remains, and it appears rounded, then you should realize that the addition of a sharp object is necessary; and if its length is such, and it is bloody, with a dark or black color, and does not cause pain to the patient, then you must be cautious in making an incision, for fear of worsening the condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you must free the hernia and press the tongue with the instrument that shapes its form, and then return it to its cavity, and make an incision with one of the two instruments used in making a double cut.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to cut anything except what is suitable for the natural term of its addition, for if you cut more than necessary, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then, make the incision, use what we recommended in the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision, use skill in the cauterization of it to ease their fear, and the manner of applying the cautery is with sharp water, for you must place the head of the patient on a suitable surface, and press the tongue down with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply this as a living flame, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concave space of the instrument whose form is thus:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extremity of the instrument, in which the medicine is placed, should be concave like a spoon's edge, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of the wound, then have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not escape due to the intrinsic action of the medicine, preventing any harm to the throat and securing it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, and squeeze it onto the uvula until the space in the back of the throat is filled with a dark, calm fluid from the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, submerge the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap in a supra-canula until the wrap adheres to the canula, do this as many times as you need until you achieve the desired effect from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then clean the cauterization of the uvula with a wrap soaked in medicine around the edge, wash it with water mixed with the medicine, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with purgatives until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this specific type of treatment is more effective than incision and free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery or incision, as it is treated in this manner: take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic rhubarb, camomile, broadleaf, and similar herbs, and address all of those causes, or some of them, in a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; then boil; and let the wave be beaten decently with a wooden instrument placed at the appropriate location on the wave. It should be made of silver or bronze.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the uvula and over it, until the uvula becomes greatly obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process with those places that have dried up, but be careful not to perform this treatment during the onset of apoplexy, as you would excessively strain the apoplexy, and it is not appropriate for you to do this unless the apoplexy has been thoroughly examined by a cauterizer.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and shape one end of it into a hook, so that the mouth of the hernia is covered, as the hook of the cane prevents the vapour from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of thorns and substances adhering to the skin, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may notice substances adhering to the skin or thorns from legs or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So then, you should remove what is apparent from these [substances], focusing your sight on it, and using the tongue against the instrument solely to identify what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the strong cause attached to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or let them swallow a piece of napkin or chopped lettuce or a crust of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can take a snake and tie it with vinegar, then place it on the table and extract it carefully; or take a worm and carefully remove its entrails and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be sharp and thin, with a slightly concave end that you insert into the patient's mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And he raises his head high and be careful of the touch of his throat bone, so that he understands the cause and treats it with the thing that pushes the bone or the spine, or what that doctor places his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if that disease infiltrates more deeply, it is better, with its knowledge of the location of the cause and its push downward, pulling his hand towards him with the instrument according to the amount prepared for him, until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating pharyngitis as described above with medications and not with cold applications, consider the patient's throat under the sun, since you have extracted his tongue with the instrument that I have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood, extract that small or subtly moving clot appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place on the concavity of the needle a hot iron, and do this several times (as long as the blood stops flowing and retreats from the wound) and keep the patient submerged in water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of that water and draw the patient's attention away from it for a while, as the blood will quickly absorb the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with thyme or asafoetida using the instruments we have described for the suffocation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls down.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation through suffocation is that you take a wave in which there are ignited coals and the wave is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening, and on this opening is placed the tip of the instrument; then apply it from above the suffocation. The patient should open his mouth at the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the suffocation does not escape until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, because the blood flow will fall down shortly.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motes again, prevent the patient from drinking, consume salty and dry food, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that these precautions be forgotten at this regimen.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the gullet when seen; it is similar to pincers, but with no curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed on the gullet, and its extremity resembles a cicada's beak, which is smoothened with lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the essence of the discourse regarding the understanding and division of their [scars or marks] symptoms.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The scars or marks are special spots, of various shapes and sizes, according to the recollection of their origin, each one described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in their perforation and division in two ways: one is for the specific type of scars themselves, and another regarding the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method refers to the locations where bodily accidents occur, as the scar from an accident on the head differs from that of the buttocks, and the scar from a fleshy part differs from that at a joint; each one has its specific surgical treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses are such that they cover those that should not be pierced, but rather the maturation of the health in those or the completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that cover being pierced when they are crossed and not mature according to their course, also have abscesses that are close to joints, where an abscess appears near a joint, the state of it is prolonged until you find something in the circuit of it, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay piercing it while it matures, it will affect the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, so pierce one that has not matured, not a raw one, otherwise you may be unable to extract its pus and it will become a fistula, or something done at the end of its course that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know the time for piercing the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that it is cured when the pain ceases and fever subsides, and there is a decrease in rigidity and pulse, and the acuteness of the sore's head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And also know how to recognize the drainage location beneath the sore, and the coming of pus from the healing of the lump.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The drainage should always be through the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the joints, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use perforation according to the affected member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to wait and observe the progress of the disease according to what has been said; for if you perforate it before its completion, it prolongs the body's illness and increases the soreness and thickness of its edges and depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Make some incisions in certain places through the thickness of the flesh or body part as required, or according to what the affected member needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large abscesses, a larger incision and wide sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other types of abscesses in which it is necessary that the cavity be hollowed out and opened, when this is done as if bread were being made, so with those that occur in cases of gangrene and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And as for those who are incised in a single section with three angles; and of those where it is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, so with the abscesses of the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And as for those with round and lunar incisions administered, resembling those mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Make a cut for those who have no such problem with surface-level apothems, ensure you make a shallow incision or one that is only slightly deep.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the apothema (swelling) is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not make a deep incision at once; instead, remove some of the pus, then on the next day re-incise slightly and extract more pus, gradually increasing the size of the incision as needed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is severely weak, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, as the animal spirit (vital force) moves quickly to escape the pus, they may die from the illness, and you must perform the operation.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be very careful with this chapter and ensure that you clean your incisions thoroughly when performing operations on these apothemas (swellings). Consider whether the swelling is minor or a deep section, and administer appropriate treatments; if the swelling is large and the incision gaps are wide, then apply pressure to each wound until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the skin or tissue is detached from the leg or has become concave in the curvature, then you should cover it with thin cloth made from linen, just as when you bandage cuts or razors, keep it moist; and tighten it after three days, and then treat and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If bleeding occurs during your operation, you should administer clean water and vinegar mixed together, and apply a cloth of linen over the area where the blood is flowing, and keep pressure on it until the bleeding subsides.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you should administer specific treatments and remedies as recommended in various parts of this book and at different divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter and the affected area contains many nerves, you should immerse the location in a mixture of hot water and oil, and apply that to the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the spots are fleshy, then you should apply powdered ointments mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and you must loosen the crust and cleanse it and administer whatever is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already said about each abscess in terms of how its cure should be addressed in particular chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl. (Forty-first chapter)
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses that occur on the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the head, there are small abscesses, which are of various types with shells that are made of layers; and each type has its own distinctive name.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come droplets, and those are the ones that contain a moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those are the ones that contain moisture similar to sweat, and they resemble it; and those are the ones that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not cause any adverse reaction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you expect those to be in the shape of an instrument called entromes, as you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what contains is moisture, then you divide that as if it were a section according to its length by cutting along this surface.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins at the section of the B line within the G line. Thus, when moisture is eliminated, you scrape that part where the moisture was present, and do not overlook any cause for its return, as troops seen returning might indicate some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the affected area in a mixture of Egyptian fire (a traditional medicinal remedy), or water and salt, if no such mixture is available; fill it with that and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that it comes into contact with on that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then repeat the application of Egyptian fire (the medicinal remedy) to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin condition; heal the wound with fire until it is cured.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with thick nodes, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have a section that is cut in the form of a cross, and it gets incised between two folds of the section and removed from all sides, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your heart rebels against what I have first told you, do as I have said.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the incision in the abscess of the section and treatment as I have told you; the incision over the abscess that is already softened is lighter because it has less pain and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are certain abscesses of these that are in the head on some men for whom there is no moisture; which causes because you have incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and left the abscess thus with a hard, sour, white stone that could not be extracted, and if anyone were to strike it, they would be infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases of accidents on the head, except for this one, which is not covered in this chapter, including the warts that appear on children's heads and require shaving the edges of the hair, the treatment for all of these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their condition, so that the disease is removed from the deeper parts to the shallower ones.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply the appropriate treatment for what is suitable to that of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Various occasions have these warts appearing in the collarbone, armpits, and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And thus it happens in the colon, and these are conditions that arise between them, and all scrofula from those is derived from its own tunic, and likewise with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have previously discussed.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are nodules, some being stone-like, others containing humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that case where you find good disposition for the touch, of which the color is proper to the color of the abscess, and it is swollen throughout, not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or arterioles, and not porous, you should incise it along the dry surface of the abscess from the inside to the outside of the body, removing it entirely from the affected area, as we have discussed regarding the abscesses of the head, and take care to extract it little by little using a knife or scissors if necessary.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the blade is not sharp enough, and your hand does not fit well with the incision, or it disturbs the illness, and you make an unnecessary incision into a vein or nerve, then you will be left with a wound filled with vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, and open up the infection, leaving that area where the acute of the abscess rests and the swelling of the infection is reduced and begins to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the small scrofulas as indicated, to see if there is any cause from the others, and make incisions into those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is at the root of a large scrofula vein, you must be careful not to incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	You must first remove that thick, twisted thread and carefully pull it out so that it does not cause further harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with fresh, young flesh that you have already purified with Egyptian ointment and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you completely incise the scrofula, be careful to close both sides of the wound so that any excess pus does not leak out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you find that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to incise the root of it, drain it, and then apply a suture and the appropriate treatment as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the scrofula that contain humidity, make a perforation at this place where you see the site of the maturation of it, and stop the perforation of what is the base of pus in the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation, find such things and resemble them, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already healed, you apply cure to what has been found of generative flesh within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the start of a new section within the medical treatise.)
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilot (or membrane) of the abscess, caused by an accidental ulceration within the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this operation on the epiglottis, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has performed such a thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription from the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Men should be aware, as the extraction of the epiglottis must be handled carefully, for if not done properly, all the veins and major structures related to the condition are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have apostemes (inflamed tonsils or glands) in the mouth or throat, if the condition is not in the tongue, it is important to avoid the operation of epiglottis extraction to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we intend to do this, cut the epiglottis with three circles around the epiglottis, or four with a small section at the distance between two circles for quantity, making the cut in the cartilage, not in the tissue, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the larynx to its full extent, and then cut the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if you know any particular cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then, he should insert the knife according to our recommendation; it signifies regarding the section of the channel for the flux that is situated in this thing that is related to its rupture and by the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is passed in which incision is feared, add two layers of the cord from the wound, and with that single one, it becomes the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then, administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of all that we have discussed is to observe that some of these ulcers have already filled the wound of the patient, and the disease has spread throughout the body, and the breath of the patient has been cut off in that place due to lack of breathing, and some are about to incise the epiglotis so that the patient may breathe over the wound and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, he will keep the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and therefore, you shall command the treatment of the wound in such a way, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for myself is that a servant cut open a wound with a knife and incised it deep into the chest, and I was called to cure him, and I noticed the breathing of the dying person, and I uncovered the plague, and I found the pus that had come from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you must confess that you have neither incised a vein nor guided the flow of blood, and the air from the wound is pure, then treat it within the fire of healing.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not be hasty in treating the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the removal of the appendix, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the removal of the abscess that occurs outside the skull, which is called a brain hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called brain hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more frequently in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is divided into two manners, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, it is not possible to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is divided into two manners: one is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is akin to apoplexy caused by the displacement of an artery, which is frightening.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a presumption about it with a sword unless it is asked for.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine the patient and investigate whether it resembles gouty nodules, and if it is not attached to any veins, then you cut it out like a node, and extract that which causes the pain from within the flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly inspect their entire body, and appropriately tend to the area in need of cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of nodal spices.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	These nodes have various spices, and I have already described all the species of their division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important that I explain the difference between a node and an exit, with due consideration.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an exit is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain, until the ebullition of excess subsides; it is complete putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A node, on the other hand, does not exhibit heat, fever, or pain, and it is characterized by that cunning lion which lies in wait for its prey.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and it is made thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either they are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So, when you come to the treatment of a node, you must expel that and inquire into the beginning of the stimulus which is called an "intromis", according as its form comes in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes; you take this stimulus and insert it in the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around it little by little until you know that this stimulus has penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the stimulus and consider what has remained in the track of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color it may be, then you insert it into the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity from the intrusion, then you know it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over the section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, lift it up and stretch it out, remove the intestines from all parts easily, and inspect the skin or sac if possible over that, and extract the organ from the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, it may not be possible to extract that organ, and you should turn your attention elsewhere, and extract it from the body in such a way as not to break any part of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from whatever cause, slight or excessive, the hernia returns, it should be treated according to custom.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that a part of the hernia is exposed, complete the repair with sharp, corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place a hot compress over the affected area, and treat the other injuries according to their respective cures until they are healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not too large, you will cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with something that adheres.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If a venous pulse is present against it, or not, you will cut and apply a hot compress to the place of the seizure, using vitriol, and leave it tight for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanc; then return to incise what is broken off from the hernia.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, of which one is largest, and another is middle-sized, and another is smallest.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the smallest instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and with precise movements, in order to properly position the instrument at the desired spots.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the ways of experienced ones, they are called alchemists, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it concerns three spices: one is great, another is medium, and the third is slight.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced medium one, shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced slight one, shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So therefore for those apertures, excitations, fistulas and buboes, so that between them are bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus are made round, thick, leathery ones, also with great needles sewn to them, of iron or of gold or of silver, and the best are when they are made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experiences of black plums are made, which remember that through these openings in the hollows of which reflections are, those reflections will be reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, others medium, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced great plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced medium plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the experienced small plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the plums are of various spices, some being simple curves, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their bodies' humors, there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these, there are two types of curves, which are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three types of curves, which are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a semi-circular curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a slight curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large body curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a half-moon, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small half-moon, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A large half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A half-moon of medium size has two curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A small half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	A large half-moon has three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A medium-sized half-moon has three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	A small half-moon has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are sharpened and cut through nodules and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, namely, large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large scalpel form:
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium scalpel form:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small scalpel form:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but designed to make a clean cut during the removal of nodules without damaging veins or nerves; and for these reasons, the patient experiences less pain and greater calmness due to the adjustments required during the excorciation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of knives, which are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The method of great healing:
Forma de magda migier:	The method of milder healing:
Forma de magda pauc:	The method of minimal healing:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of leather and look like the skin of a rabbit, on which alcohol is also applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the end of this side, there is a pointed instrument hidden and in that course it goes inside and outside according to your will, as desired.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of instruments, which are hidden between these times during the piercing of the apertures and do not affect the patients, are of three kinds: great, milder, and minimal.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vents through which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three kinds; great, medium, and small; their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citric metal, round or of some length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these species of vents must be great, medium, and small, so that by opening them, the flow of blood is stopped quickly when necessary, and they are used as a first aid measure when other remedies are not at hand.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using these to stop blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, just as with the varices of the legs and thighs, and the varices of the arms, and of the breasts and abdomen, and of the groins, similar to their fleshy counterparts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes, these small instruments are made in the shape of surgical blades; by which the blood is stopped when performed through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the mammary glands of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the mammary glands of certain men become inflamed due to the effect of sleeping in an awkward position, and they become inflamed, and because the mammary glands are assembled from the women's breasts, they protrude outward, becoming distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who desire this, be aware that you must incise those parts in the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excise the entire grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and close the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If a mammary gland retracts to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it should be cut into two halves, each with an incision resembling a crescent moon, of which each one contains the other until the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape of the line B and G. And then extract the cord between the two lips of the ulcer, stop the discharge, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, what is necessary for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision of what needs to be incised due to the patient's restlessness and the flow of pus, then you must fill the ulcer with a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is broken off from the crust, and then care for it until it is cured.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the piercing of abscesses that come from the inflammation.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the inflammation are symptoms of scrofula, hard growths that contain a pus-like substance.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And regarding those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar section as per this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, you should close it with a strip of cloth and check for any signs of recurrence the following day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage clean and change it regularly until the wound is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the abscess is of the nodal type or from scrofula, then you should incise it as we have described for scrofula above.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague spreads so as to cause gangrene, then apply cauterization to it as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	**Capitol .xlix.** (Capital X, Forty-ninth Chapter)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of apoplexy that occurs through archery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow pierces through and the string is tightened over that part, then inflammation and apoplexy occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and apoplexy are caused by an artery or vein: for when apoplexy is due to an arrow, a long quantity of blood is accumulated in the preon (abdominal cavity) of the body; and when you press on the apoplexy, you feel a noise coming from it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein returns abruptly to the appearance of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section of this apoplexy is wrong, especially in those that leave open the armpits, and in the angles, and in the collarbone, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, so be careful that its cure does not escape, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Place a cloth soaked in hot water over the affected area to reduce inflammation from the painful arches; then cut the long cloth into two sections; and with one section, make incisions and release the pressure from the arch, and with the other, remove the bandages that cover it, until it is completely exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take the needle and make it penetrate between the two layers, and tighten the arch with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to pull out both arches located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the pressure to the area between the two ligaments using a spatula until the swelling subsides completely, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and use a suitable poultice to care for it until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is caused by a cut vein, you must hold your hand over it as close as possible to the abscess, and then insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, and make it penetrate; then wrap the thread around it in a double knot until you extract the other side from the opposite direction, and tie the abscess with the thread according to what I have told you regarding the grapevine ligament on both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread may break, insert the needle again at the same point of the incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Next, dry the wound in the middle part of it; when the swelling has subsided, then make an incision to remove the excess skin, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the poultice you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the treatment that is needed until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	To complete the treatment of the wound, which occurs due to the compression of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, when a hernia occurs in the rear or vein, and it appears to be similar to a hernia occurring in the nerves due to their compression or excessive strain, or for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is applied to the areas of the assistants or the legs, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it occurs in their most vital parts; when it is tightened by violent force, the patient feels a stupor-like suffering from the illness.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an apoplexy of the extremities but affects the whole body; it does not go to any particular part in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have it in their joints, one should not assume it is due to a bone fracture, as they will experience severe contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One should apply a hot compress to anyone who has it on the head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a minor abscess, then cut it open with scissors and remove that part by its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and cut it out, and close it up; and dress the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs from the chest down to the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Even some people observe swollen glands in the bellies of those individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called funguals because they resemble mushrooms; the roots of these are subtle, while the heads of them are large. And the edges of these are convoluted, and it is from these that a great discharge (or abscess) results.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and within their belly were two parts that served as functions similar to each other, and there was no difference between those white, small ones.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were reversed and split open, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut these off and tighten the bandage on the foot, one at 18 inches (quays xviii unc) and the other at 6 inches (quays vi unc).
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure for their incision is that you must consider if the patient's malady is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, with a subtle texture; then you cut them with a broad knife, and apply cautery to them over a flame, as you have seen, in order to expel the effusion of blood; and if it seems that the blood flows, cauterize that part.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and trembling, be careful not to make an incision with a sharp steel; then take fresh plaster made, strengthen that bandage, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust the tightness of the lead string; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large lead after it has been cut and fallen by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or trembling in making an incision into it, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you make an incision into the mass, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care that it is healed, as the disease is cured.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and moves regularly, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us return to the recollection of the cure.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia or protrusion of the navel is caused by various factors: either through gaps in the abdominal wall above the stomach, and from these openings emanate the intestines or hernias as appropriate in other ruptures; or due to a vein or artery constricting (sanct) as described previously; or because of excess gas trapped within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is indeed due to a gap in the abdominal wall and the protruding hernia, then the color of the hernia will resemble that of the body; it is very painful, and appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the evacuation of the intestine, note the position of that part which we have described above, with greater diversity, and when you press on that mass, it is concealed, then return; it is very stiff in its place, and it requires much effort to insert water and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, then it is a tumor and not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it compressed or cut.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear as a black-deforming abscess.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then it is a severe, thick, and hard abscess, and it varies in size according to the quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind, then the touch of it is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from gas; then know that you should abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as it is taught in the chapter where I spoke about hernias by arteria and vena.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then know that you should order the patient to take a deep breath and be stretched out; then make several attempts around the entire navel, and command him to lie on his back between your hands over his loins, and encircle the area with a strong thread or a soft one in a proper manner. Then extend the extent of the hernia upwards towards its origin using a large hook; and tighten the thread or soft material around the circumference of the navel in a suitable manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then cut the hernia away from its attachment and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; if you have secured or observed it by means of the ligament, then carefully pull it out and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the thread, then take some oil; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circumambulate that place, and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into the two strong threads and, in the manner of a cross, pierce through the circuit you have made around the abscess; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the place to heal until the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or cut away that part when it has softened and separated, and then treat it with something that will cleanse the wounds until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is only flesh or due to moisture, then cover that place as we have said and remove the sanch or moisture which you find there, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have discussed, in the previous section, the types of cracks and the methods by which they are treated using medicine, and how cure with metal is avoided so as not to ulcerate; we also spoke about the causes of cracks and precautions for their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients also said that, in some cases, cracks can be in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, as with the crack that occurs in the breasts or in the groin and similar areas of the body; especially when it has just begun and is small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	However, if it is very old and deep, it may not be possible to cure it on its own, as I have neither seen nor heard of any success in that regard.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said, you must proceed and remove the illness and purge of black choler some times, and then clean that, if a manifest relief is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and ensure that all incisions made are properly sealed; and carefully examine from every side with a good look to ensure that no cause for complication from the roots of the illness remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then do not let the blood flow, and do not abruptly remove it, press the places, and cleanse the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at your disposal from among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it causes you difficulty to make an incision of a large vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then take care of it with the other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops from water and the signs of each type, regarding their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitres or the species of hydrops, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanitre with medicines and do not agree with your treatment, consider this, for if the disease has already weakened the patient or it is another malady, other than that specific hydrops, such as in those parts of the body or abdominal conditions similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you observe the patient's excessive growth and it is not another malady but hydropic only, without inflammation or aging, then the manner of operating on it is that you lift the malady between your hands, apply your hand to press the abdomen, expel the water from its origin beyond the pubic area, and take a sharp spatula as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp extremity as well as the spatula; however, make it not too short, so that during operation with this one does not enter the abdomen, and you hold it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydropics is from the bowels, then you must, through section, move away from the navel by a distance of three fingers on either side, to the right of it over the pubic area.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydropics is due to illness of the bowel, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the formation of it is due to inflammation, then your section should be on the affected joint.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And be sure that your section is on the side where the malady wishes to go, so as not to spread superfluity to that painful place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then thoroughly perforate the entire channel with the instrument, and insert your hand into that section, raising it between the canal and the effect, and extract it; and if it is the size of a fingernail or similar.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the hernia until the space is reached that you want to reach, and it is in the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that, and insert an instrument whose shape is as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, and in its initial part there is a small hole, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; its end is cut out according to the shape of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the tube there is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately sucks up the water through the instrument, thus evacuating a significant quantity in a short time; if you evacuate more water than can be contained in one hour, then the patient's life will be endangered by the resolution of their animal spirit or he may suffer an immediate stroke that brings death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	One should evacuate according to the capacity of the tube and according to one's understanding of the patient's condition, considering the virtue of the pulse and the quality of the humors.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after removing the instrument, retain the water that is retained due to the pressure of the tube that blocks the opening through which it was inserted; I recommend that you perforate it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the procedure with the instrument on another day if the illness tolerates it, extract a small quantity of water and do this for several days in fear, beware of making an error so as not to remove too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear the illness and read of a great quantity of water, then treat it as burial in sand, dip it in bathwater, and leave it in the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cautery to the stomach, and with the blade and fire, extract the water as I have recounted above.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose genitals are not naturally open for urination.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times, a child is born from its mother's belly with the head of its mixture (amniotic sac) not pierced (or it is too tight or in the wrong position).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to pierce (the amniotic sac) as soon as the child is born with a gentle and subtle movement in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, with a gentle movement, insert a thin lead clamp and tie it off; do this for three days or seven.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, let them pass urine gently and slowly; then return (the child) to their position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not secure the lead clamp, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not be contained by this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	If that of which the pain is sharp should be treated with a lead clavicle, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it should be treated thus, which is the cause of those who are born with a hernia and cannot urinate during micturition, until the hernia is raised with the hand above the parts; and this is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a motile disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the hernia be turned over on its back, and then extend the head of the hernia with your left hand by vigorous traction, and cut the head of the hernia from the place of the perineum with a scalpel, as if it were an incision with a pen, or whatever tool you prefer, so that the middle part of the hernia appears similar to the head of the hernia and the hernia falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your procedure to remove the flow of blood, for complications may arise from it; stop the bleeding where it cuts off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albaster (or white stone) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Complications may arise from this albaster on the penis, causing swelling and prominence of the flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant (malignant) and others are not (benign).
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Benign (non-malignant), take care to suspend it gently and remove that one completely; then place your hand over the affected area with a poultice of Egyptian ointment; and after that, treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the blister is malignant and turns black, you should cover it with cautery near its incision and cut it out.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the blister is on the prepuce of an uncircumcised penis, and one side of the blister is inside the prepuce while the other side is outside, you should treat the blister inside first before treating the external area; for when you cure the external part, there is no guarantee that it will not reoccur.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also, there are instances in the genitals and prepuce that turn black and inflamed; therefore, you should remove everything that has already turned dark or is about to corrupt or is corrupted; then apply a line of medicine onto it made from wheat bran mixed with crushed chickpeas and lentils.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat the other wound with the same care until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an excessive flow of blood, then administer cautery monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	This cautery is useful for two purposes, either to stop the flow of blood or to treat a wound when it is corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the foreskin is completely corroded and destroyed, then insert a lead tube into the inside of the foreskin so that the infection urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to its head (and this adherence only occurs in those where the foreskin is attached, and circumcision is not required); when adhesion occurs due to an infection or abscess, then use a blunt spatula to carefully loosen the ligament and completely free the head of the foreskin.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then use a spatula to carefully remove the foreskin from the head, and this is because when the foreskin is thin, its delicate nature makes it easily torn.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, as it has already been rinsed in water to prevent adhesion again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat it with a styptic to ensure that it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of newborns and the treatment of issues that arise during circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for all ailments, but when it is performed as part of our own actions and our own will, and when it is done at an early age, it is necessary that we approach this better operation with greater care to ensure the well-being of the child.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of their free lands, as they were not commanded by their laws, and only because we have acquired through experimentation that this practice causes great pain, which is why I have allowed the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with new tools and knives; they use glue for bandaging and finger nails for incision.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And having tried all these methods and not finding improvement with knives, ointments, or threads, since the nail of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer sticks out, it is forced to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the circumcision that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, is not safe for the incision of the end of the male member, as it is tight within the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with the nail, since it is tight, it will damage the knife and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and in many cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen that myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the preparation that is made with scissors and linen tied with thread, I have discovered through experience its goodness, because the scissors are of a proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand, the two sharp edges meet in one time; and it makes compression of the linen in the form containing the knot of the whip from every side, at which no error is found.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understands a little, do not make any other move but to tie the linen around its whip, and let that enter into the other on the following day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make that person happy in every way that receives their understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure that person is well prepared and not afraid; hide the scissors in your hand or place the foot so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the base of the anus, and clean that which has been added to it due to impurities.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then secure the location with a signet ring folded in half, tie a small thread below it as a second ligature, place your finger over it and point to the location of the ligature left open, and insert between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then elevate the anus slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; clean the wound thoroughly, preferably with lye, spread a cloth soaked in warm, recently boiled oil over it, place that over the wound for another day, and treat it with cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the instruments for cleansing, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities should not be of equal length; some should be longer and others shorter, so that the bone of the toe is not left out, and both have the same length as two handgrips.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in purification is that they strongly flee from the intrinsic code, or part of it, which must be incised.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, I command you to extend the one from your hand to your finger in front of the placement of the place and inscribe it according to this equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, extract it with your thumb and inscribe that one.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If three days have passed and it is seen that the swelling left by the aposteme is decreased, then leave it until the aposteme heals cautiously, extract it easily, and inscribe it according to what you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, as it will not come out here.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that which the plague has solidified with the powders we have discussed in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the cord on measure and follows the folds of its origin, it will not notice it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to that which we have said should be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or sand, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those we have discussed regarding treatment in the chapter.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if urine is not discharged and its retention persists due to pressure, which already exists in the bladder's neck, then know that the illness is still bent upon its sides.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on someone else's back and stretch their abdomen away from their back, extending it as much as possible. The illness will tighten its grip on the affected area as much as it can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the bladder's neck is constricted, it prevents the discharge of urine into the rear parts, so the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not resolved as we have said, then you should address the cause of the illness directly. You do this by using a syringe, which has this form: made of silver and very thin, with a needle of fine hair-like texture, similar to a palm and a half, and a thin cane at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination is such that you take the folded urethra and tie it at the end of a string or cotton for good drainage; then insert the ends of the urethra into the meatus, and cut with scissors if any excess cause from the string is present, but more carefully insert it into the catheter. Then quickly open the meatus with the forceps and soak it in honey and alum.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make an incision on the patient's side, open the vesica and clean it with oils mixed with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the forceps with ease until it reaches the root of the stone; then fold the stone towards the opening of the urethra; and pull the forceps from that side; and pull the forceps until it reaches the vesica, and cent the patient's pain to be caused by the stone, and do not use this method in any other way than the one mentioned, where the meat is found to be twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then gradually extend the umbilical cord, little by little, as the urine dries out the cord.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the cure of urine, using a catheter, do not cease to do this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient's discomfort relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capital .lix. (This appears to be an abbreviation or a section header, so without additional context, I cannot provide a direct translation.)
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder clistering with stone and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an occurrence of bladder ulceration or abscess, or a buildup of pus in that area, and you wish to drain water and medications from it, then use an instrument known as a clampcedra (a type of clister), and this is how it is used:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if its opening at the end is closed, it remains blocked.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts to this process: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a congestion, which is what is inflamed, and according to the quantity that oppresses it, it adds to it; provided that when some cause throws off humidity from it, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled, water is thrown into it, and when it is long-lasting, it becomes like a clog in which naphtha is caught in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clog into the humidity and throw it against the parts above, because the humidity is thrown into the cavity of the clog.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clog into the wound as we have recommended in the surgery; and push the humidity against what you are pushing, because that humidity goes to the bladder soon enough, and the evil centers around it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is crystalized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or lead, which looks like a small feather, and leaves a trail of glue behind.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then tightly tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the urine.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand over the bladder with the humidity, gently stretching it until the patient feels that the humidity has fully entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then perforate that circle in its entirety; next, insert a strong thread through those holes, twisting them as tightly as possible; and add water to the circle, as if you were adding heat, since you focus on what you want to extract of humidity, odor, and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you attach that to the instrument and make it in the same way as you have made the bladder, and express with your hand within so that the humidity goes to the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	**Capitol LXX (Lxx)**
De extraccio de peyra.	**On the Extraction of Stone**
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each type.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they tell you of that most manifest exposition and concise summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that the disease born in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, appearing sandy; and the illness irritates its verge, causing frequent pain, and it often becomes inflamed; and this is how they get sores on their buttocks because of these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that condition is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it is more common due to what exists between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, it is necessary at the beginning to cleanse the malady with chrism that extracts all the opening in their bowels; for that opening sometimes blocks the flow of urine after its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then, while holding the hernia in their hands and positioning it correctly, they should twist and massage it so that the urine descends to the opening of the bladder or sometimes it may pop out of place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then use the appropriate forceps between their legs, and let the other assistants hold the patient's legs, so that the bladder is completely released and inclines towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then, after removing it all, inspect the entire area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then cut it open with a scalpel as soon as possible.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the pain does not subside from any treatment, you should apply oil to the specific indicated area of your left hand, if the illness is in a child or its small part in a young person, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And once the stone is extracted, ensure it does not remain in any part of the body.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that incision into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that area with your hand, specifically indicated, and expel it outside after removing the stone from its place.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above, and with their left hand, pull the skin away from the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula incidentally into this, which is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It then divides into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, starting on the side of the left thigh; and the section should be over that bone and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the outer cut is wide and inner narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the stone possible, not major, because strongly it comprehends the saying that what is in the buttock the stone should be divided, and this is forgotten its disability.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some stone with angles and edges, so the extraction of it is made difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that substance is like a grain, round, and it is made of the lighter extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is one that has angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it cannot be opened in this manner, cover your hands over it or tighten them around it appropriately, the end of which should be like a lime that you tighten onto the stone, without slipping from it; or insert from beside it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see any pus, cut and tighten it with hot iron.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder and cut it; then push a little water in; and it should come out as two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it with a great section, which causes two problems for the patient: either it stops (the flow of urine) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, because the location is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May you administer an expulsion of it from within while it is still inside, or use a lever at the fracture of it to extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to ensure the heat slowly escapes.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then re-position the patient on their back, and do not disturb the dressing for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the dressing is loose, wash the area with water and oil, and then apply a paste of honey and alum until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of an abscess, cauterization and drainage are performed, and it resembles as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and due to this the flow of urine is blocked (and this is known as the expulsion of urine with a delay), then insert a tube into the abscess and drain that pus, for if it causes corrosion and putrefaction in the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the abscess with wine, water, and salt, and against all kinds of things that are beneficial for its healing until it is completely cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the stages of healing, make sure that both parts are joined and adjust the medicines that are applied over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urinary tract, and its passage through urine is blocked, treat it with what I have recommended beforehand to prevent dissection, for many attempts through this treatment can lead to dissection; and after probing and dreading, this is what you should do:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of a triangular extremity, sharp, stuck in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take a thread, tie it to the stone, leaving it near the bladder so that it does not return to the kidney.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the stone, piercing it easily until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that stone, slowly, and pierce the opening until you make it from one side to the other; for soon the urine will be drained.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then place your hand over what is broken off from the stone that projects outside of the bladder, for it is torn and drained by the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for your condition for some reason that precludes it, then attach one bandage to the foot and another above the foot.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then apply pressure to the foot at that point between two joints.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the ligament and clean the infected ulcer that is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave a bandage on the foot, except to prevent it from returning to the hernia, and the other bandage above it, for when the bandage is loosened, the bulge returns to its place and the pain reappears.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And this is necessary when you attach the bandage above, that you raise the bulge towards its upper parts, or it returns to its proper place, and the pain appears again, as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	The extraction of stones from the kidneys of women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women's kidneys are seldom generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If one sees a stone in any of those (organs), the cure is then difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their (organs) is that women who are strong endure less pain.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that one does not find a woman more wise than to discover if she should go to a doctor when she is sick, or whether it is from women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that one does not find women more skilled in this art, especially in surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the leg in women is distant from the location of the wound, so it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, you should seek a female midwife well-versed in this, and her assistance is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are devoid of that expertise, seek out a midwife skilled and subtle, or present a well-esteemed female matron in the matter of women's health, or a woman who has mastered this art through experience.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So, present this woman, and command her to do everything you instruct, from inquiring about the wound to its beginning; this is because she must observe if the woman is a virgin, then know that she should insert her finger into the woman's anus and feel for the wound.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, cut it off and leave its tongue, then command him to incise upon it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not possible, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and feel over the testicles, for she places her left hand on the bladder and extracts urine with due care.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, slowly remove that which is obstructing the opening of the bladder towards the external parts, at the same time using your strength until it passes through the gap in the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then make an incision over that position of the bladder, at the opening of the thigh, and place the foot on that part to prevent it from moving, and do not allow the finger to be cut off by the urethra.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the cut should be shallow at first; then insert the blade into that cut and, if the pain is felt, adjust the cut according to the quantity by which you know the pain will be relieved from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the parts of the kidney are numerous: some are small and sharp, others are large and harsh, and some are elongated and round, and they have spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the number of parts (of the kidney) in order to understand what you mean when you speak about them.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vinegar mixed with salt to the area and leave it for an hour until the blood clot is formed, then return to your operation until the kidney stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of kidney stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from a cut, then place powder on the wound, gently apply those medicinal powders and stricture descent, and do not repeat it; remove the stone and do not extract it, for strong will the illness die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the intensity of the blood loss diminishes, the wound may heal, then you return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white skin, which leaves the opening of the generative veins containing the blood, and it is called the inguinal cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the own panniculus that nature prepares for the departure of a humors, as long as it is one humor or another; and it is the end of the generation between the white bone which we have mentioned, and it is not this but hard.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens to the muscles, so that this matter is discharged into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck on the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humors has no distinct color, for the color of them may be declining to citron or sanguine, or red, or black putrid, or white watery, and it is this one that is most dangerous.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows this addition of water are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining a little towards length, with the appearance of a humor, since the humors are present from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in his own pannicle, then the abscess becomes round and from it man thinks it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the toes of the feet and the white skin, then there arises a feeling of itching.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the color of the humidity, you should observe the color of the humidity in the abscess as it comes out, and according to what is observed in the traces left by it, judge what is within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be fleebotomized if it is within your power, and empty the contents of it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place yourself supine on your back for some time, and lay a moist cloth over it.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the patient's left side and instruct the assistant to follow his right side, who will extend their leg from one to two feet at the knee joint and at the meeting point of the genitals and the lower abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a long knife and cut the knee joint of the genitals from its middle position close to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the cut according to the specified measurement from the line you've marked on the skin of the genitals, reaching the white bone in the middle.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then extract it, observe, and watch carefully so as not to pierce; your extraction should be thorough yet gentle, and examine the wound according to the amount you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then punch the white bone with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then carefully separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the cutting edge to the edges; do not touch the wound with your fingers, and cut the scissor in that way that is within your ability.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Cut this either in its entirety or in parts, and most importantly along its thin edges, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is a risk that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you remove the wound from its original location during your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the scissor, return it to its place, and carefully adjust the two lips of the wound of the genitals with sutures, and then treat it in the same way as the others, as long as it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then you should tie the vessels that are above the suspensory, remove the worm, and then treat it in the same way as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is added in two parts equally, then know that both are hernias; therefore, incise the part as you did with the other contrarywise; and if it appears to be an operation to you, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you shall cleanse the wound, and enter into the sections of the wet lanolin submerged in oil or olive oil; place another strip of lanolin that you have submerged in wine and oil outside, and stretch that over both genitals and the wonder of the belly; then place it on folded drapes and poultices, and wrap those with a linen according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two sheets and fold them with wool threads in this manner; press the extremities where they are joined or with moist wool, add them to the structure in the crotch of the pants, one extremity from the anus enters between the two, and the second extremity touches the opening of the leg, and all the tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with a knife; so you take a delicate cut-wound cautery and make an incision at the roots of the veins, and ignite it according to what we have recommended, so that the white skin containing the water be exposed, and then you take the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to Greek script.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that skin, and ignite it until all the moisture is drained out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the skin with incisions, and scrape it with a fine cautery ignited; cut it according to your ability until everything is removed; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is much safer and farther from any infection, and better than an operation with a knife.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you difficulty to make an incision or apply cautery, or if there is bleeding, then you must cure the difficulty that affects you through this treatment, a remedy that suits it as said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is in great pain and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horror, then perforation should be administered as we have recommended; and it is at this point, as we have said regarding the meanings, that you must determine if that hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you must know how to stop the patient's pain on some elevated area, then perforate the aperture in the lower part of the abscess with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the aperture should be wide enough to let all the water out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand over the area to seal it, pressing it tightly so that the water does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then attend to that internal part until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is any contraindication to draining the water at that time when you puncture it: this should not be done unless the white pannus in the orifice of the plague causes obstruction and prevents the discharge of water, then you must use a drain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the pus; its shape should precede; or apply a small amount to the plague's surface.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns and remains for about five or seven months; and when it is added, it should be punctured in the same way, so that the plague will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII. (No translation is provided as the text seems to be a heading or a book title, not part of a medical treatise.)
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Hernia (Fleshy Hernia) and Its Treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the section about this hernia, one risks losing important dispositions; for it is my opinion that its dismissal and salvation lie in that remedy.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on that one and the use of poultices for the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that abscesses appear in parts of the body where the veins are composed and are formed due to several causes: either by a sudden, intense inflammation that pours into the veins, or by injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the appearance of the abscess varies according to the color of the affected area, and it does not cause pain in itself, but is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very rarely is the abscess hardened, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause any sensation.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And in some cases, it is caused by the movement of the joints, or by the inflammation of those parts which have already been perceived as painful, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that when it is caused by the inflammation of joints, it is recognized by the spreading of the abscess when you press those parts; and it does not matter if that touches you.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	That which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse from it for any reason; you must apply compression to those parts.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this species, a section is made and on the other meats; and you inscribe the signature of the genius, then stretch them from their parts, extract the white chyle, dissolve the suspensory of the vessels, tie them, and inscribe the suspensory, as you dissolve that of all parts of the testis.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the bone has already been consolidated in that flesh, then you must extract the bone and cut into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any reason in the joint, or between what is between the sockets, then you must dissolve all that adhesion and cut into it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must cut into all that belongs to it, and extract the bone as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool saturated in rose oil and wine; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .LXIV. (If the text is organized into chapters, this would refer to Chapter 46.)
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an apostema (hernia) enveloped by some kind of thickening similar to a bud or the softening of the testicles, making it difficult for the patient to move and walk due to the pain.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this malady, it is important to address what preceded it, as memory plays a role in its cure.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is important to note that they mention an operation according to which I have done the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And they say that you should cease the malady on a raised cushion; then, dislodge the suspensory of the testicles from its place; next, take hold of the scrotum with both hands, extending them to their full extent with vehemence.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut with a sharp knife, along a longitudinal section, through the vessel until they are all exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from every part as we have said in the extraction of arcane, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then take a needle with a double thread, and pass it through the first part where the wound occurs, and pass the other thread through the last part of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut them in the middle part with a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you wish to prevent generation, so that vessels which do not yield from either of two origins, do not become malignant.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If a vein bursts at all the openings, then you must know if the testicles are extracted or if they are squeezed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the veins, and that they become stagnant, or if they cease to function properly with respect to those.
Capitol .lxv.	It appears that you have provided only the capital letter "LXV" without any context or additional text. To assist you effectively, I need more information about what "LXV" refers to, whether it's part of a code, an abbreviation, or a specific text from a book. Could you please provide more details?
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	# On the Care of Intestinal Hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the wall of the abdomen, extending from the angles of the navel, allowing the intestines to protrude through it.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either of the abdomen or of an excrescence, and occurs due to various motive causes: a blow, sudden movement, shouting, lifting some heavy object, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it is accompanied by swelling, so that the abdomen compresses the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a tear in the abdomen, as at the beginning, it causes sudden, intense pain; and there appears a different swelling below the affected area, which results from the protrusion of intestines, and this is due to the expansion of the bowels.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is caused by air, and in other cases, it runs along the hernia gap, becoming trapped here, which greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with iron, great caution is required so as to avoid injury during the procedure.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The technique for operating on this condition is to force the hernia back into its cavity using your hand inside the patient's body, then turn it over and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then close the incision around the testicles by stitching the edges, passing the thread through the entire length of the scrotum; and secure it in two layers from the cut section as needed to open the incision.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is made according to the amount that it is possible for you to remove from that part, without leaving a scar.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then cut away those bodies which are left at the base of the testicles, taking care to expose the white, hard mass of each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into the space between the testicle, where the white mass is, at the base of the testis, and between the second mass, and free that adhesion which is behind the testis.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then with your hand, take hold of the testicles at the orifice of their cavity, and extending the white mass with your left hand, raise the testis to the incision site; and command the assistant to stretch out the testis while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek the threads that hold the intestine wrapped in the hard white ciphell.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause for the intestine's condition, then turn your attention to the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a strong thread of silk, and insert it through the last part of the ciphell, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is cut; and cut off the extremities that emerge from the silk within four threads, and tie them to some figure in the shape of a cross; and attach to this the ciphell from which we said the cord of the testicles was left.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And wrap the threads around the extremities and tie them tightly together so that none of the vessels that nourish these can cause any problem, preventing putrefaction from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And another time, apply the poultice according to the first application, at a distance of three days from it; then separate these two poultices from the ciphas which leaves the cord of the testicles as much as the size of the said poultice, and cut off all the remaining parts according to their shape, and keep away from it the heat.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then, cut into the opening left by the cord of the testicles, sectioning it from which flows blood and health as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply the wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; use the poultice as recommended (and sometimes, the white ciphas are cauterized, as we said, to prevent bleeding during incisions, since this has been seen to cause these problems) and leave the poultice until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is prolonged, then water with vinegar should be used and applied to it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cure for the plague with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Chapter LXVI**
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventous Hernia**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been observed that indicates a successful cure for it by force.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first approach is to do as we have recommended for hernias that are alive; which is to open the sac close to the affected area with a cut; and then dry the middle part around the aperture with something that promotes healing, until the bags fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation suffered in the angles (or joints).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, as we have said, dislocations occur in the angles, and they protrude from their position.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not question the natural cause of hernias to the natural creator; and if you do, it is rare, and it returns on its own in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the condition persists, a fracture may occur in the bone within, before the hernia descends into the bone; and this happens due to the extension of the angle (or joint), which causes the bone to stretch, become weakened, and protrude.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it involves cauterization, as is preceded by the narration of the condition.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the condition is cured by cutting according to this manner: the disease remains on both sides between the thighs, and then the site of the rupture of the prominent aponeuroses is cut in a specific location according to the amount of three parts.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white string that is beneath the bone until it is completely exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the reed and place it over the prominent location of the string, and press it against the abdomen's point.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then identify the two prominent points on the end of the string's reed, and adjust one of these to the suture with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then carefully extract the end of the bowel, do not pierce its entire thickness, nor extend the wound, or any other cause, so you know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then carefully tend to the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the fistulas, cleanse them, and restore the ulcer until it is consolidated; for the tissue is contracted and the protrusion of rupture is not yet adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better at this site, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testicles is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and thus it is important to pay attention to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it becomes necessary for the one who is asked to treat the patient that he lay the malady according to its nature, and expose all the stitches that are softened over the natural wound; and then fit two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if desired, at the beginning, the superfluity of the softened stitch can be removed with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert the instrument between the stitches; and then take care for the healing of the other plagues within that it be sane and the filth fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is condemned in our law, but there are two reasons why I will remind you of it in this book; the one is so that the physician may understand it when asked about its treatment, since he knows the cure for such cases; and the other reason is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young ones, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by incision and section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and tender so that they can be suspended.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not show the mark of the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration by incision and section, first ensure you have the animal and with your left hand, press the cord of its testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then attach the ligatures, and cut across each one with a section, ensuring two threads pass through.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut away that pus which you have lanced.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any causes untreated from the chest, but rather the subtle chest condition that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this manner of castration, the one that is done by tying, it is better because it leaves no cause for the testicles, so the beast does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then tend to the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an abnormality in the space within the scrotum where the testicles are located, resembling both male and female characteristics, including hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, this flow of urine is seen from the base of the testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females, there is a difference: the female organ over the penis has two parts resembling the testes of males, slightly smaller at the external opening, also with the perineum and two ovaries.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for males and one for females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary to insert those tight cloths within the opening so as to stop the flow of that emission, and then treat those with the cure for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second type of males, where urine is discharged from the base of the testes, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the lymph glands is most appropriately addressed according to natural causes; however, it is sometimes enlarged in some women to such a degree that it spreads as in men and even pervades during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So then, if you have an excess of lymph fluid in your hand or fingers, insert a needle and draw it out.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And finally, do not pierce through the flesh's surface, particularly at the point of the rash, to avoid drawing out pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then apply care as part of the cure for plagues until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is born is flesh that lacks in the horror of death until it fills itself, and it quickly becomes apparent to those who inspect it (and for this reason some initially called it "tail-born disease"); therefore we must incise it as we incision the limb, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Cure for Hoarseness.**
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hoarseness is when the woman's vocal cords are not pierced or a small wound is present.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded it, and it is caused by flesh that is improperly adjusted or by subtle and thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made either in the region of the mother, or in the ribs, or in the upper part of the body, or in its lower parts, and it prevents from coughing and sneezing and childbearing, and strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of that is made by observing the uterus, if the pregnancy is visible, then it is advised; but if it is not visible, you should seek that among your fingers or by touch.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the pregnancy is subtle and it is felt in both lips, then you should cut and dislodge it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it should be placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers indicate the depth of both at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her limbs extended, and then force open both lips so that the subtle sign of pregnancy is broken and the pregnancy is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it over the area, and apply heat to the site daily so that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the tumor is large and thick, then you should incise it with a broad knife or a blade made of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for the flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and roots, adjusted to an ointment of oil.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days, administering a dry compress.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural birth of others meats, and then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	May be so for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the extremities should not be opposed with force in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of the tail and red botch that happens in the hindquarter of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of small veins, rather than from those of larger ones; and when they are old and hard, they become painful.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now that we have discussed the parts and signs of these ailments, let me also say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it says that hemorrhoids and ulcers are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not affect sensation, but in those cases, treatment with iron is not effective.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the body, on which sensation can be felt, are those that are curable.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be careful not to place the woman in a position where she is exposed, extend her legs apart with forks or rough cloth, and cut those with sharp blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those parts the flux of holy water from one of the sacred powders, as with cassia and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of pus persists, then make a drain in decoction with added extracts from nettles and other similar herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, make a paste from this and apply it to the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess bursts, it is good; otherwise, adhere to the two vents and make incisions at the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or the juice of arugula or the juice of yarrow mixed with wine, make it adhere to the area, and treat the place with a poultice until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the patient, who is of a keen mind, understand that you must incise here according to your judgment from what appears to you, as I have said in my oath.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which must be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an accidental wound in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	You encounter special kinds of accidents in the head, such as cracks and open sores, ulcers, swelling, eruptions, fistulas with bleeding, abscesses, and other wounds.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments and their kinds, the signs of each, and their divisions, as well as their treatments.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise of gangrene the kind you see in the majority of cases, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed on it with a knife.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So, then consider that in the beginning of gangrene pain is sharp, with percussion and fever, and sometimes there is swelling, and if you do not remove it by perforation, treat it with what helps the maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must tie the patient down to a bed with two ropes; lay them on their back and align their feet at the lowest part of the abdomen, expanding their thighs, supporting their arms below their elbows, and attaching some to the bed with appropriate bands.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the right and administer the instrument that opens the orifice of the wound, the shape of which will be appropriate for those causes that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to use this instrument, ensure that you hold the handle of the main part of the device, and whatever part of the instrument enters into the patient should not be larger than the handle of the main part and it should ease the pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the handle of the mother, then it is necessary to place poultices over the texture of the handle of the mother so that no part of the instrument can enter into the handle of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And ensure that you place the weight of the instrument from above and have the assistant hold the instrument, then slowly turn the weight until the opening of the mother is completely open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation occurs and it is painful and hot to the touch, then ensure that you quickly clean that part with a hot sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanie (vomits) is evacuated, you must place a cloth soaked in warm or cold oil on the pain, and press the compress on the section below the navel towards the spine.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then pull the cloth out from under the navel and place it on the penis, a clean cloth soaked in water with mulle (mallow) roots.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then the treatment is considered complete after two days, applying what is suitable for it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	In some cases, the navel and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then immersed in water containing extracts of lilies or long-stemmed aromatic plants, and finally, the application is renewed.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the pain is deep inside the navel, you must avoid treating it with fire, but rather focus on the treatments we have discussed in the previous sections.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos should be treated when they are in a non-natural state.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should know the beginning of the natural childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman straining at the contractions and desires to breathe the air; she is distanced from what is upon her during childbirth, and the expulsion of the embryo is hastened. At this point, you must understand that this delivery is according to a natural figure, and the descent of the embryo is over her head or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that her belly is contracting so that the embryo descends slightly when it is over her head; then she experiences the second stage, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who is affected in this manner in a part other than usual is not natural or commendable, for when the disorder has seized his feet and his body is positioned with his head below his feet and his hands on his ankles or at his foot, or his head and hands are above his feet, or his belly is turned towards his back, he seems unworthy of consideration.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in dealing with all such cases, and should avoid errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the signs of those, and what understanding is in those so that it can be made clear about this and stood upon.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the disease appears on his head due to natural weakness, and it is vehement against women and becomes a difficult task for them, sometimes their virtue is already depleted, then they should use, what women have, a poultice of fennel seed and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the meter between their open spaces, gently inserting the second one, or rather, that with its finger, until it reaches what is within of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the child is being delivered.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come down, then cover the woman with a poultice of goosefeathers and fenugreek, bound together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient, change the poultice, and do what causes them to sneeze in this condition; also close their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the effect is forgotten soonest.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the effects are forgotten at the beginning, then cover them with ease, gradually reducing them.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her feet up, and then position the mat on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the pain persists and the child dies, then incise those areas and extract the rupture from the fetus or tie the body to the mother's breast and extract that part equally, for it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the weight of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus weighs down on its feet, you must push those towards you, and gradually turn the small body, and take one of its feet and stretch out those little ones.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If it is situated within the spaces, then command the patient to exhale and cause that condition to pass, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then you return the small wound little by little until it heals according to its natural shape, for that will be forgotten concerning the lighter aspect.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do what we have recommended, then take a mixture of althae and dissolved gum, and pound it all in a mortar with good percussion, and return the congealed mass of the woman's abdomen, along with the pus, into the wound.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply that cesarean section in sterilized water, as long as the hypocondria (a term referring to a region of the body associated with disease or pain) are achieved.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts that have been separated from him are no longer inflamed, then apply the fumigation of mint and gently place it on him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the fumigation for an hour, then you make a cesarean section over it, and make him sneeze and pull his mouth away, and press the lower part of his abdomen gently with lighter compression, for the wound will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the condition of their hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition presents itself in this manner, then you should skillfully insert your hands little by little; have the woman bend over her waist, let her feet hang down, and place herself on her knees, thus completing the required positions.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the patient's belly little by little, and extract whatever remains in their feet, from the joints, so that it is ready for the next phase of treatment.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the condition has not been fully treated, take the patient's feet and move them vigorously, then gently press on the hip joints little by little until the treatment is complete.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands again and continue the treatment little by little, and instruct the woman to exhale as the condition is relieved.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The condition of the patient lies lateral during treatment on one of their sides.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use ingenuity in reducing the swelling of the hand; if you cannot reduce it, raise the limb and do that instead.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If raising the limb is not possible, then have the patient lie down and gently beat the affected area with a mallet, then apply moist compresses and poultices as recommended by experienced healers.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the condition relates to childbirth, then apply pressure over the cesarean section, study the reduction of the hand, and gently manipulate the fetus back into its natural position; have the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until the pain subsides.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The condition involves the fetus with its arms expanded, stretching the skin and fascia of the mother's abdominal wall to twice its normal size.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Nurse should have her hand on the child and slowly turn him this way and that, so as to make it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it has swelled, then place over the top of it what we have recommended of oil and bandages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then you should command the patient to move their legs little by little, and when you have done this, make them lie down on one side and command them to bend over; then command them to be turned over and lie on their back; and do as the condition requires.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you observe the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert the second instrument into your hand as if it were a sponge within what needs to be emptied of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the hernia is suspended over the face and neck, you will incise it with an instrument, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then, gradually, you push the hernia inside until it stops in the place where it covers, and order the woman to buy some light weights, so that, by God's will, they can be removed when needed.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Double birth or multiple pregnancy.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twins are born, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and difficult; however, these may be due to natural causes, not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And regarding these cases, whether they are multiples, a second one, and they are separated by counting, distinguish those who enter the ligament in each other's navel; some births are lost this way, as if it were a natural light weight, and some births remain alive despite not being able to be saved.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if certain aspects of their condition prove difficult to treat and you reach the point we mentioned regarding unnatural forms, then tend to them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and accomplishes this with ease and subtlety, without delay, and uses ingenuity according to every form as she prepares the body for the necessary aid leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder that it forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they form in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have already verified that a woman who has aborted cannot become pregnant again, or else all of them cause great damage due to the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this should be in the knowledge of midwives so that they understand well what is happening to those young women, and thus pay close attention to it because it is very important.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the removal of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus using the methods we have discussed in the section on treatment and it does not leave the mother's body, and you are compelled to use manual means, then consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not susceptible to any of the conditions that could lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now, you should position the woman so that she lies on her side with her head inclined forward and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The midwife should support both of the woman's sides or be placed under her in the lying position to prevent her body from moving during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the patient with oils, and with a paste of aloe and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife uses her hand with these oils and pastes, she introduces her hand into the mother with ease, and searches for the place where the cuts are made in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate place is found: then consider whether the fetus is ready to be delivered head first, and make incisions in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or leave the beard, or in the fork of the spine, or in the places near the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the delivery is to be over the feet of the patient, then in the pubis or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And take care that he holds the ungument with his right hand, and places the curve of it at that spot which is between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his finger with ease and keeps the ungument in one of those positions we mentioned, aiming to reach the underlying cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and hold another finger in the correct position, or the third if necessary, so that it attracts equally, and does not extend beyond its natural range.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And consider the whole process, so that the removal of it is facilitated as much as possible, just as is done in any other case for the eradication of a tumor.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them, so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it remains stuck, then the midwife should apply some of her chosen oils to these spots and insert her fingers skillfully and turn those parts that are stuck.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the fetus' position is overlooked, the incisions will be changed to another place where pus is present; and do so until all the fetus is removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is twisted and cannot be reduced due to its state, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and extract it until all is removed, cutting it either at the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And similarly, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction during delivery, or it is in a position where water cannot flow out, then you must insert between the edges of the spine and split the head, or use an instrument called an "alundat," which resembles other instruments described in the chapters that follow.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it seems that this work is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that we insert this balm or take that medicine as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is set and compressed, then its fork should be split to allow the moisture in the foot to drain.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not contradict any rules, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdomen pain is from an apoplexy or is water-related, then you must perforate that part to drain the moisture within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the operation is on their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction to the mother's opening should also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly and foot are squeezed, then you must extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the stomach and foot until what is inside comes out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are held still and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the mother's womb is open, then enter your hand through the opening of the vulva, seek for the head, and pull it towards you, and afterwards insert one, or two fingers, and push it inside her.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's womb is constricted due to an abscess that occurs in her, then be careful not to agitate it; instead, you must first provide enemas of greasy, humid substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices, and keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the issue is on their side, try to use a knife: and administer what we have said about the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise into the bones, and extract them.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause within the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the cure for these wounds that occur from the major incident.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding from the wound, stop it with strict water and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose belly was containing a dead child, and another time over that fire she became pregnant, and another time the outcome was a dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his leg; it swelled up like fire, and he began to shiver with fever.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the illness is not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should focus on them from some causes of strong attraction, and extract one bone from them, and after a few days, another; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Thus, you will pursue the illness, extract many bones from them, in the woman's best dispositions, and already have experienced such manner for a long time, correcting it with a small amount of medicine.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be strange that it should be thus, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the doctor's art in administering treatment with his hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a strapper in which the limbs are secured, with two points of attachment on each end of the feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this strap should be made to be neither too tight nor too loose, and it can be made of either silk or leather.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each leather should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and the margin on either side of each finger should be one palm length; in the middle part of both leathers, there should be two fastenings already secured, whose length is a little less than a palm, and the width of each should be about two fingers, or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mother's opening so that they can be opened when you turn to those prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that subtle and lighter pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of birch wood or bone, according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, on the extremity of it, there should be two additional parts as well, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and their width is approximately two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, you should lay the woman on her side with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand over the instrument using the clamping forceps, according to the amount you want from the mother's opening, until the meter indicates what you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness that the ancients spoke of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The mechanism that causes the movement, which drives the process:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The way of understanding, which contains the great secret:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is constructed like tongs with teeth at the end, thus when it grasps, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, also with teeth like a reaping tooth that cuts and contains.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The way of understanding in brief:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of the instrument lacking a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of the instrument lacking two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps with teeth that close in which the head of the child is contained.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A form of spatula with two ends, one of which cuts off the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, they are then easier to use in their operations and more beneficial for people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already prepared, for the need for those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second (part/item).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in a certain way, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe outside, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, then take a blade and make a hole in the cover, opening the mouth of the mother with herbs such as warm and harsh ginger, chamomile, and licorice root, as well as cinnamon and cassia wood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, keeping it so that the steam goes into the concave part of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And do as we have said, making them sneeze, and the second stage will pass quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If one approaches this cure with caution and not haste, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm sesame or mullein oil, and then insert that same hand into the patient's anus and gently search around until she feels the second one, and once found, slowly extract it little by little according to the prescribed method so that the mother does not feel any violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	As soon as you notice that the pain is changing from the right to the left side, facilitate movement.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's passage is blocked, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication made from various herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to do anything in the course of abstraction, but understand that what comes from him to the mouth of the mother lies in the matter of the female, and then anoint it with a discovery and a tetracyclic; for it will rot away in a few days and will be dissolved and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	If you notice a high fever in the head and stomach, it causes the disease; then understand that vapors and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used vapor from burning fennel and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menses and afterchildbed:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to make a cut or an incision.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoke should be directed away from the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke is consumed, then repeat another time.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants have navels that are not pierced, which naturally become slightly inflamed and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then teach the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp instrument, taking care not to touch the scar.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and tend to that sore with a clean ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of oppression, apply pressure on the wound through a tube for several days, and stop it when the child wants to eat.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that oppression occurs in the rectum for the consolidation of a wound or abscess; then ensure that that consolidation is incised, and apply treatment with the water and lead we have mentioned regarding healing.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the healing of fistulas that have formed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that form in the perineum contain a low and thick pus, which often protrude from near the anus or in the space of one opening.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a wound.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that movement is old and due to the flow of moist, white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known for what is issued from them through the exit and by inflammation; and sometimes the patient uses a tool for egress, and very strong is what issues from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And regarding those fistulas, some are found in the space they penetrate within the bladder, and within the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate within the joint of the thigh and within the nut (testicle) of the scrotum.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And regarding the case where a known fistula penetrates but does not exit, you should insert the thin tip of the catheters into the anus, and attempt to gently erode or cut into the fistula when there is no turbulence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the tension or hair in the correct position.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all or there is no cause for the pain, as we have said, you will know that it is non-penetrating and then you must proceed to treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and its prohibition until the affected area is healed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that tension prevails here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the surrounding region; and it brings pus constantly; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the healing of those requires work and patience from skilled physicians upon whom their safety depends.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with herbs is hoped for as you have been advised and what you have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the disease moves between the patient's thighs over their sides and raises their legs within them, the parts are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a plug of lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, knowing the place where you insert the plug.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert the knife directly into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the knife already has made an opening and is penetrating on its own, or you feel something between the knife and that part, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Some people nonetheless say that it heals certain men's joints.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which one hopes to heal them quickly, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh surrounding the fistula, which is similar to a quill of plume, has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then dress those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the surrounding flesh is healed, and treat those wounds with medications that promote healing and consolidation of the flesh; if it heals well, it is; otherwise, it will not be cured by any other treatment within a certain time frame.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt to insert it does not succeed into the depth mentioned, and between that and the attempt that is slightly of flesh or bone, and the fistula is extended to where the surface of the wound is exposed, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the attempt drying as well; once the drying reaches the point at which the tip of the attempt penetrates, the attempt is freed and removed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those infected flesh which resemble a tube of pain from an external source and have not been torn for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those flesh, then the best course is to use an instrument that leaches out the pus, either by cauterizing with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire promotes good healing: it adjusts those inflamed flesh and removes the pus through exsecation of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then tend to those wrapped in bandages or pressed between parts of the body, and attend to the pain from hard flesh grown over and hardened by infection.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines should include stoppage and excision; when the pain is alleviated, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert a small instrument into the anus and examine it carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if the growth is tender and between you and it there is clearly a distinction between flesh and bone, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition is administered in three ways: first, by cauterization as mentioned earlier; second, by drying out the growth until you can reach its cavity so that you can insert something and provide the necessary cure; and you should not use excessive cutting or incise to remove the scar tissue containing the pus, lest you cause further damage to the patient's will. And take care of it as we have said, so that it heals quickly. Or, elongate that membrane and drain the pus from inside, just as mentioned earlier, or with a probe or another instrument with a sharp tip, and surgically remove those fistulated meats which are in the incision within the anus; and make every effort to restore the whole wound through surgery, and if the opening of the fistula above does not heal properly, it will reopen due to the patient's condition.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus near the surface of the body and on the margin of the anus, take the probe of the pierced end, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert yourself into that fold covered with veins or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is penetrant near the margin of the anus directly, then extract the vein from that tract thus you have inserted the tip into the anus; extract the end of the vein and adjust both ends, then apply each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you more deeply insert the vein into the flesh, begin again until those carnes between the two extremities of the vein are incised which fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either by using a probe, for it is not suitable for you to do this so as not to cause damage; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spindle-spined instrument by which the fistula is incised: its curvature is acute in one part and the other part is not acute, so as not to damage what is not necessary when using it.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where an infection runs in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways, for they either appear between the buttocks resembling stones, or those are swollen with searing pain.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the fever runs from them at that time and is one, and it is hot, and it comes out of its place, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are exclusively hot and dry according to a few humors, of which citrinus water or a little fever runs continuously, and they are according to the body's color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the chest is to have the patient lie down and squeeze until the fever burns out and the hemorrhages appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with pins or what you have at hand, and return those parts to their places.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the pins are not held in place by the humidity of those parts and their softening, then take a rough cloth or a cotton swab or a woolen thread and extract those with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powders prepared for incision over them, so that they adhere to those parts instead of cautery; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then sharpen the knife used for incision, wash it in water that is in the wound and which obstructs the escape of the hernia slightly when the hernia is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external, their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your finger, or those with a horn, and cut them, then attend to them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for whoever performs the incision, know how to close it with a suture according to this manner: take a thread wrapped in wool and pass it through the hemorrhoid from above, then pass the needle into the root of the other part below, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the passage and leave them outside the needle; do this laterally and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this completely, leaving none of them attached, so that the excess of blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a cloth soaked in warm oil or wax on it and press down, and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that from the wound; and when it heals, treat those with ointments or other remedies until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Treatment of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas may occur due to drying out of an opening or due to constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they have been long-standing and no longer respond to those medications, you must clean them with the points of a spatula or your finger, making sure they remain moist and draining the pus from them, which prevents their hardening; then treat them until they are hardened.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those with a strong reason, more urgent than the first that enters, and ensure they are carefully cleaned; then take care of those inside so that they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernias is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia, it is crucial, and not only if they become red according to the color of the body resembling a clavicle head, but they are made everywhere in the body and most notably in the parts where the pain occurs, especially in the feet and sides, and through those pains, you should treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so you should incise what is in the path of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and extract it from its position; then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May a veruca be a small, rough, round ulcer raised on the surface of the body, and is often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is that you extend and incise that, or clean it with a knife or needle within the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And such warts, both internal and external, can be eradicated with the instrument that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a tick be a small, hardened or fistulated lump on the surface of the body, often moving in the skin, and when it is disturbed, it feels like a mosquito bite around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a thin needle of goose or deer feather, and make it strong, and place it over the swelling until it contains the circle of the needle; then turn your hand with the needle inside until you pierce what is in the circuit of the swelling, and place it on the muscle of the flesh, and eradicate the swelling from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The extraction from the needle should be delicate, without perforation, wrapped around itself so that when it is removed from the swelling, its appearance is preserved and the revolution of that is complete.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as described above in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give injections.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the injection is given with silver or lead or bronze needles, melted and shaped, and sometimes with small or large instruments according to those used in treatment, for that which is administered to the very young children should be small; and of those whose edges are sharp or painful, the injections of these shall be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few injections:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the syringe's nozzle, in which the bag is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished at the place where the bag is attached as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), bent with subtlety; and on one side of its length there are two channels, and on the other side a single channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, and for the larger ones a bit smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be filled with medicines from the bladder of a beast or sheep's skin, and its size be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced through many parts like this when it is twisted; and if the space between the parts is as wide as the said thickness.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those parts strong sharp stone of fresh stone, or surround them; and adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is stopped in it, make it tight at the top of the channel between two distinct parts at a firm constriction, and then cauterize each part: but the quality of cauterizing those parts is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too long or too tight.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then place the patient on their back, and raise their legs on pillows or a lance, and apply the end of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the anus with ease, and let the practitioner take the bag and squeeze it twice more strongly until everything in the channel is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cautery and let the patient lower their legs.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with that all night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that applying heat to the pains of intestinal solutions and vomiting releases them, then you apply cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or fistulas in the anus causing pain, then apply gentle heat and the kind of cautery that children use to cut them.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already spoken about the division of the cure for plagues according to each case, and you have given as much information as possible about their treatment with herbs and medicines according to need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place where the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues spread include the heat of fire, incision of space or skin, impact with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on wounds.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Plagues that are in places on the body can be similarly to a plague that strikes the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is very necessary to recommend treatment for some plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate concerning other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it says that when a simple plague occurs on the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of stone or something similar, and the patient has already bitten the tongue deeply and it is a severe plague causing concern about the progression of apostema, then you should immediately perform a cerebral fleubotomy and extract the clot from the sinus according to the amount of virtue (blood) in it, unless any other cause prohibits fleubotomy, especially if the sinus that forms from the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the fleubotomy should be performed contrary to the previous plague; and attention must be given to preventing the patient from reclining, sitting up, or consuming large amounts of food and drink.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If, however, any cause prohibits the minimum (fleubotomy), then reduce the intake of food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And with regard to the plague, if it develops into cautious apostema, apply a small amount of hot oil or wine in which a reed has been soaked.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the apothema (infection), then place your hand on the sore, if it is fresh and the air has not changed the powder which I have just mentioned, then gently press.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or due to a rupture of space and appearance, and the edges of it are not suitable for stitching by themselves, then adjust them with stitches according to the suture method I have mentioned for their healing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the sore has already exposed the bone and penis, and it is not swollen but a small suspended one, then cut it open and treat the sore with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the place of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from food that is rough: seeds and hard forms like theirs, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, you cut off all the rotten parts and remove them, and then care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues involve an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not severed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you cut it with a knife or tie it; and if cauterization is required to prevent the pus from draining after it has been removed, do so.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is this: take equal parts of olive oil from broken olives, dragon's blood twice as much, and three times as much mastic gum; mix all together finely and fill the plague with it, then apply firm pressure to ensure it sticks, and coagulate the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, do not touch it while it is in that state so that the medicine does not leave until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times, it requires only cautery, when there is no acute pain or inflammation.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is performed on large hernias when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and they are recent hernias with fresh inflammation, where the air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has been altered, especially in summer, then one cannot understand the position of this powder, but instead, cure them as we have said, by pausing over these alcus (possibly abscesses) with hot ointments or by pausing over the swelling parts of the body with water and honey until they are cured; and then apply other treatments to those until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in a bone and it is small, then you extract it with your hands.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And tell the treatment for fractures of the head which is dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the ailment occurs in the neck, it does not differ much in treatment from an illness of the neck, and between the head's ailment when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is not much to do except avoid any treatment that causes strong spasms, thus using poultices and bandages as if they were vinegar and similar substances to soothe them and relax the tension on the nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of all members' functions.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If it is to be cured by lighter medicines, then it is washed with water twice, sometimes soaked in rosewater or not, and rubbed when washed with water, and the other remedies are applied afterward following this method, and moisture is added.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	However, if the pain is severe, then stitches are administered, or the opening of it is narrowed, and afterwards, treatment with poultices is done until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	However, if the pain is deep or an abscess forms in it at a low place due to a break, then it is pierced at the most sensitive location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already incised in the plague and blood flow results, separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if that is what causes the need for it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spinal bones of the neck or all are already incised and the veins in the neck are preserved, adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck and do not touch that; then equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and tighten that with proper tension, and leave it for some days; and then care for that with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already taken hold in the bones, then probe it and if there are any fragments within, extract as many of them as you can; leave what is not suitable for you, until the plague is dried up, separated, and removed from it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the affliction is recent, sprinkle on that powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the affliction involves an open wound, treat it with that which will help remember its cure in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the afflictions of the collarbone or similar, when it strikes between the shoulders and is painful at the joints or edge or lance or similarly, it should be treated accordingly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or edge percussion and it strikes the depth of the body, then consider more carefully if the affliction has any air bubbles when the patient cries out; you should know that the affliction may be fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not a deep wound and the affliction is recent according to its mark, then you should place on it from the first hour the recommended powder, and do not press upon it so that the mark does not remain in the depth of the body and returns to the heart, causing harm to the patient; instead, place on it an attractive ointment, and wipe it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then you apply a cold compress to the wound's surface until it absorbs the moisture; and make the patient lie upon the sore so that what is within flows out properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If after three days the wound is passing well and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or tightness of the chest occur to the patient, and other good dispositions are observed, then you know that the wound is saved; and thereafter treat it with cool compresses and other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is prolonged, and it remains open for a long time, then you know that a fistula has formed; so treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a sword or axe cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with the method mentioned above for binding, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If a valuable skill has already been gained in working with bones, and you have already made incisions and removed the affected parts, then twist the pain and cut to extract those parts if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the parts are not separated, leave them inside so that the pain subsides, as extraction from them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents in other parts, the treatment from the beginning is what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal pains.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the stomach is great or slight or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In cases of great pain, the intestine or abdominal nerves are affected, so that their insertion is made with greater or lesser force and the suture of them is either very violent or very delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And when a small disruption is caused, it is difficult to be rectified in another manner, and I know that the reduction of them is all the more difficult if you do not take care of their reinsertion into their place immediately, for they open up and thicken, making it difficult to insert anything.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is to move it slightly, for in that case, the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of sutures are commonly used for the suturing of other bodily wounds.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two types of sutures also communicate with other wounds, but they are more appropriate for the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend that each of you make an exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it is said that when the hernia is small and there is no cause from within the abdomen for it, and it becomes difficult to reduce, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the narrowing of the rupture as we have said, or when the hernia has come about through inflammation in the abdomen caused by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then you should know that you must apply a compress to it in such a way that you submerge a moist sponge or cloth in warm water, or take water with squid, cypress, and spice, and wrap it around the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, they use a mixture that has been strained, and it is better than just water for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you have seen that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the hernia with water in which high and malt are mixed, for by this the inner parts of it are relieved from a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is excusable to insert something near this treatment, then you should cut the disruption with a small, sharp instrument that incises hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate not to cut, and there is no need to dry or deprive of nutrition.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp knife, and another part not so acute, and the tip should be slightly blunt, not too delicate; it should be obtuse rather than pointed.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the plague is exacerbated and the intestine protrudes, it should be returned to its natural position in its proper place, if possible; this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the rupture is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the abdomen, you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, you should elevate the patient's head and feet above the rupture.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the rupture appears in either of the two parts of the abdomen, you must always pause and direct your attention to it, so that the gap where the pain is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And also, you must administer this to both major and minor ailments.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	For minor ailments, apply what you have prepared, and ensure the medicine is between your fingers, which hold the rupture entirely in their grasp and adjust the lips of the wound, and then gradually uncover from one part to another, searching for any cause that might disrupt the suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then lay it near the end of the tear in the annular finger, and tighten the needle, so that you do not pierce both ends of the cord, but rather the two ends of the phalange that remains within the wound, until you make the thread penetrate through that gap; and you have already added the two ends of the cord and the two ends of the phalange, thus making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then tighten the thread double in the loop of the needle, and in some cases, join two parts together, and add both lips and the wound through proper addition; then lay down the thickness of the finger and fix another needle to it, and attach that as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completely filled the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, because the finer needles slice through the flesh slightly; while the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the wound, hence it is necessary that they be both finer and coarser in thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And ensure that the needle is inserted into both ends of the affected limb gently, so as not to deeply wound the flesh and disrupt the healing process before consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And avoid prolonged stitching so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then carefully cut the ends of the needles so they do not hurt the patient during their sleep; place your hand over the stitches, applying gentle pressure from all sides, with the needle tips; and leave them there until you know that the wound is fully healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, where one or two needles or even more can be used in the stitch.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second stitch is different: you must administer a stitch through all four ends, from the thigh and two ends of the leg, at once, using a needle with thread meticulously and carefully wrapped around it in terms of both fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle split part from which it began, so that the thread retracts the pus-filled opening split to the wound, so that the suture is as secure as a cloth suture by which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each suture, hold the amount of thickness of the largest needle.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture heals men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I have closed the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, which was afflicted by a knife, and it was a rupture of the wound that was greater than a palm, and there was a gap around two palms from the opening of the intestine at the middle part of the body; and then I reduced that part that the intestine had been ruptured for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague, once established in the space of 15 days or so, is cured and considered healed; and it may recur for many years, and be managed according to its disposition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other physicians had judged that it was not curable; and by a miracle of fire, for the pain did not subside when treated with ointments or any medicine, but only after applying heat to the plague for a short period twice a day and frequent ablutions with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell of two kinds of sewing according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the sewing of the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates the wound and at the junction where it enters, according to rectitude and length throughout the body, leaving the tip of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and you make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside through the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have managed to insert it, you will insert it again on the other side at the same extreme of the wound from outside towards inside; and leave the edge of the skin that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other extreme of the wound from inside towards outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And insert again with the same penetration that you use to insert into the skin at the extreme of the wound which is inside, so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin at this side of the wound, and with the same extreme that is on the other side of the skin, extract the needle from the thread by which it penetrates, and return it to that thread, and place the extreme of the skin that is on the other side against this edge of the wound; and extract from the thread that is part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this over and over again, and do it one more time properly until you have closed everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of sewing is that you sew with a needle through the skin, stitching the flesh, so that you sew the seam once from the end of the toe, and then again when you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suture, which is peculiarly Italian, and this one is spoken of and used by physicians, is that you sew the second layer with a needle, adding each part to its natural counterpart; then you apply one end of the thread to one extreme of the wound and the other end to the opposite extreme, and it is done according to your skill.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should keep the needle at the end of the wound towards your own hand, and make it penetrate into the flesh from inside out, passing through both ends of the wound; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate again from outside in, through both ends of the wound.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then carefully reverse those folds, and cause some of the contents from within to penetrate between the two extremities of the mirror, except for the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common lightweight suture, and it is a suture of which we have previously spoken.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they might say, the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles; so you insert a thread into some of these, and begin the introduction of this needle, and make it penetrate between the other side according to the suture of those which join the flesh firmly.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment of this illness should be judged according to other illnesses.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which causes, when you recognize the recent illness due to its pain in front of the hernia that the air alters it, and return the intestine to its place and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the illness, then place your hand over that acid which is within your presence so that it causes hard pain and breaks the tissues, and they become consolidated quickly and miraculously; and similarly treat that illness as with other illnesses until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have any medicines at hand, then focus on these remedies, for when it begins to feel better, removing the cause and repeating this twice a day is enough, as you have been taught, until it heals, since you should not need other types of medication due to simple illnesses.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the contagion may spread to the vital parts of the body, then cover the wound with a lion's wool soaked in oil of high quality or olive oil and place it in the places where the angles are, and leave the covers.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, which signs you have noticed, then immerse that part in a black, astringent vinegar, especially if the inflammation has been caused by an object protruding into the cavity of the hernia.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the thick hernia has a slower healing than the one in the thin hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And its healing is difficult because the hernia called "gugnu" does not receive healing from any plague that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins present there, and to the magnitude of it, and to the subtlety of that part of the body, and to its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the disease is the fabric, and you achieve that recently, reduce it according to your prescription, which reduces hernias in general.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been some time and the affected area has turned white or black, then tighten the bandage over the spot that is discolored from it, so that pus flows, for in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you cut what is another part of the bandage, and place two ends of the bandage on either side of the affected area, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it should be relieved, and the emission of the plague's breath stopped.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so that you may see those who were once plagued in their stomachs by the impact of lances, and they had an ancient plague with fistulas, and from its management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the cure of the patient, even if it was not confirmed in their healing, but continue to apply heat to that part which is healed and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having observed the location now consolidated, pay attention to the illness that engenders in them an accident of evil in their belly; do not force anything for this ill-accident and broken in their delicate dispositions eating and drinking, and then bathe frequently and exercise as it is said.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And certain experienced ones say that when you must treat an intestinal plague, small or large, it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: take sharp forks from large heads; then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a fork from those which open the mouth over both lips of the plague; therefore, when you grasp those and tighten your mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another fork near the first, and do not cease doing this until you have tied several forks according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that part with the pain and bring it to health; and remove those attached parts within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine may be seen as a thin thread taken from the intestine of an animal, finer than a hair; and so you take the end of these intestinal threads, quite bare, and approach the end of it to the thread, wrap it, and then insert that thread into the needle and sew up the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the pain is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it is not only a question of extraction, but also of healing it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every ulcer and fistula that forms as one ages and becomes old, if it is not healed and solidified, persists for a long time and does not heal, then in any part of the body, it is generally called a fistula and we refer to it as an ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistulas, in truth, are narrow, hard, white spaces that are not painful and have a hollowed-out appearance just like the one caused by external injury; therefore, they are called alcus (ulcer) because of their pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In ulcers, moisture forms which can cause pain; and in some hours, the humidity is absorbed.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is evident, and sometimes it is scarce, and hard, and thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already prepared it as described in the division, when you mention the sores, know that any ulcer that does not heal or is not in the naked flesh is due to one of these causes: among which one is either a lack of blood flow in the body; or because of evil spirits; or because there is hard, prohibitive tissue between it and the lips; or because it is too heavy; or because the ulcer itself becomes pus and the material that enters it is of bad quality; or because the remedy is inappropriate for its cure; or when corruption takes hold in the region, and it becomes a pestilence; or due to the property of the region, just as it happens in Zaragoza, where difficult digestion of ailments occurs, and healing from abscesses by nature takes time; or because there is a bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already shown all those causes and the signs of them, and in the division, the remedies for their cure.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so it is also necessary for you to know the cure for a fistula that is caused through surgical means by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the skull, or to the abdominal cavity, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the spinal joints composed as the hand and foot; and these cause proximity to the principal member and similar symptoms.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, of these fistulas, those following this manner are from diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If it is one of these fistulas that is so deep as not to reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take the attempt with a knife or scalpel, and if the fistula is as it should be, and after questioning it, you find it useful.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, examine it carefully with a thin blade, for the weight of its body being lifted and curved away from the twist must be corrected.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely painful condition, it is not within your power to attempt to treat it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the orifices with extreme care, for the moisture by which you clean them must also affect the other orifices and their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you must inquire very carefully, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the depression of the fistula is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula with only extremely painful orifices, over which all your strength, all your questioning, all your probing into the patient's suffering, and all your discovery of the pain through your compression with your hand on the area, as well as any similarities in accidents to the abscess, depend.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will proceed to treatment with confidence; for you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close to or distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places that you know and deem suitable.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you inspect the fistula according to what has been said in the description of it, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and whatever has formed in the orifice of the flesh, or from tissue and similar things, and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude, you must incise it in the place where it enters as deeply as you can reach, and then clean it thoroughly of all corrupt flesh; and then apply some wrapped bandages with sharp medicaments, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have understood with your hand.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And for this purpose, some use certain sights within which acute medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then, once the wound is healed, clean those that have generated healthy flesh until it is completely cured.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then examine it and dry it as we have recommended; however, do not neglect any cause from veins or nerves or major limbs as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or discoloration, then you should clean it until the corruption is completely gone; and then care for that area as it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the disease does not respond to treatment in this way as it should, then you will know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; and then you examine it again precisely to discover the cause of it and its purification with the last strengthening force, and then restore it accordingly.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is cured, then it is good; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep and remote parts of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore your remedy for it is to cleanse that alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small and within your reach, then you can remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause for concern in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of discomfort arises from humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and dislocate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to extract the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the wound where the pain is most intense, and leave it there until the pain subsides, ensuring that the wound is between the bones, muscles, and ligaments, and watch for any signs of infection in the wound that you have incised during surgery.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Previously, if you fear, place a hand on the part immersed in hot oil, or immersed in Egyptian alum, or any of the verdant alkalis, for when these ligaments and bones are separated by their action, and that attraction is removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the tibia or thighbone or similar, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of the wound, then quickly remove that affected part as soon as possible before the blackness and corruption spreads, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close and completely incise within the area where the corruption has taken place, and then treat it once it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to stop it at its simplest and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around XXX years old experiences pain in his thigh, and the pain arises from within due to an abscess inside the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is an abscess or a great abscess without any external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And thus, over time, the condition worsens due to the mistakes of the doctors as the abscess becomes enlarged, and it attracts moving parts, and its treatment is delayed until the leg becomes fistulated, causing horrific sores that lead to decay and bodily humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then a multitude of doctors around two years later, not focusing on the wisdom of those times but on the arts, as you have been called to do so.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the patient's legs and the substances that were flowing from them through these terrible wounds; and already the condition of that man was entirely stable, and the colour of him was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you insert the probe into one of these wounds and succeed in reaching the bone with the probe.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then you carefully examine all the wounds and discover those that have reached their limits from every part of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut and incise over one of those wounds until I discovered a fracture of the bone, and found it corrupted, wretched, and decomposed; and already a part of the leg was rotten and putrefied, and had been penetrated right to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I will secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I considered that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I will cease the restoration of the illness with medicinal consolidators for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I will examine and uncover the bone again according to the initial discovery, and look for continued corruption within the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I secured what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I had a hole made for the cure of it and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so I uncovered it again and did not cease to carefully cut the bone in small pieces and make an incision for its restoration, but it was not restored until I removed a portion around a palm of it, extracted what was within its marrow, and then restored it with medicine; it became slightly strengthened and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And further operation of it and cutting of it is not necessary except for the arrangement of the hernia's edges and due to the patient's weak endurance and fear of death, as it becomes unconscious at all times due to excessive evacuation, a bad sign.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is achieved through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its arrangement within the body is good, and its virtue returns; it is guided by its dispositions, and no harm comes to it during movement or any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If a bone protrudes from the body, you should act as follows: take a strong ligament and tighten it around the end of the protruding bone, asking someone to stretch it; then attach a thicker ligament over the first one. Then place this ligament on the flesh left by the bone, extending its end so that you can pull the flesh away from the parts below, thus uncovering the flesh where you want to make an incision, so as not to damage the flesh with the saw.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a cushion or table beneath the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And take care that the sawing over the corrupt place is done little by little, because if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its sensation, then force the saw another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it is a continuous fracture from one side to another, and the corruption is in the middle or at a part of it, you must uncover the flesh from all parts; and then place a cushion beneath, and saw the first fracture where the corruption entered until the other fracture is completed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in a joint, cut that corrupt joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but requires skill.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into how the corruption appears to you, and open it up, and remove it according to some disposition possible to you, and by skilled reasoning rectify it so that no veins or nerves are harmed.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels to use when cutting these bones, as they depend very much on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness or thinness, and their size or smallness, and their hardness or rarity; so you must prepare suitable tools for any type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you have need; since you possess great learning and long experience of the manners of this art, and are witness to the ways of many illnesses, for now you will employ to it what is suitable for it among instruments for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And thus, at the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples of those which you will employ in accordance with your prohibition, which you will experience upon others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the shape of a starred key, and its points are in the shape of surgical needles.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to apply them unless the heads of the joints are compressed when they are corrupted, or the mouth is widely opened.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger rasor compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller rasor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the broad rasor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved from the middle and have a sharp edge, and the boy's limb is cut down with a descending knife.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of the razor with its concave form:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The shape of another razor, more subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with an extremely curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of the saw-like incisor that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller saw:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another type of saw; this one resembling a ray, with its tip like a serrated edge, often used in various places for cutting bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray that is appropriate for reason of one who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and of acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and in a way that covers all the causes we have mentioned of razors, knives, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremity and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you apply to that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption worsens and affects a member that is not initially involved, then you must incise that member within the area where the corruption has spread, so that the malady is removed and the member saved from death or further harm.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black as long as it is enclosed by a wound that fire has burned, or if you see the darkness extending to another part of the body where it was previously not present and affects the whole body; and so cut with an incision from that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it seems to be caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources, such as from a sea scorpion or a viper or a leech and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is on the tip of the finger, you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it seems to affect the hand, you cut off that of the affected finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the whole arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead, you cut through that, incise the arm within the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and the elbow is affected again, then it is the end of the patient's suffering; and to treat any other cause due to this in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, cut through it within one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot's edge, cut through the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter within the toe, then cut through the leg within the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then it is not worth attempting to cure it, and let the patient face death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or cutting off a member is that you tighten the ligament at the point where you want to make the incision, and tighten another ligament over the place; and the instrument extends a ligament between the parts left behind, and the minister expands another ligament on top of them; and then separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without any space in between so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or sliced.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with clean cloth from all sides to prevent any contact with the wound, and ensure the patient's injury is aligned and cauterized safely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the wound carefully or apply some powders to constrict the blood flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member to the appropriate ligament, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I tell you that you must remove a black, painful lump from a man's foot, this accident which I and you have recommended, which is caused by the inflammation of heat in their foot similar to the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption, caused primarily in their foot's inner part, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself with the same tool he used to see the cure go to the member with the violence of its pain and heat of the inflammation, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that tool caused corruption in the inner part of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it struck me, and I felt compelled to reflect on that superfluity with the water that had been placed over my hand as a cure, returning the body's purification to him; and the superfluity is not purged, and it begins in another inner part that it started from my hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor, with a pointed instrument, cuts open the patient's hand, and does not wish to do so hoping for the resolution of that excess, but rather you must adhere to the incision of the dead hand, because the virtue of the disease was on the brink of collapse.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And as he (the patient) has departed from me, he has returned to his land and overcome me with the fact that that man had prepared and cut open his hand completely, and he has been healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this story merely to provide aid regarding this illness, but also to explain its meaning and according to which it is understood.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the cure of wounds and the quality of enema therapy with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When a gangrenous ulcer occurs in some fleshy member and the space of the ulcer is prolonged as far as it collects pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus oozes out from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it becomes thin, and does not reach a state of complete corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption entirely envelops a member, it is then called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is that you cut through that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with thread, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord adheres and that that corruption does not succeed due to its last effects, and the cord has passed through from front, then treat it with a cleanser.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and honey, received in equal parts, mixed in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash the affected sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the foot, and leave the medicine on it for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that foul substance; do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the pain is alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, enema treatment is given with ash water when this medicine is not available; take the ash of vines, mix it with water, and use that to wash out the affected area until you feel that the sinus has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash out the affected area with a mixture of honey and water, adding a third part of ginger; also wash it with a mixture of wine and honey, as honey purifies and washes, while wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when there has been an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the inflammation has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which causes flesh to be born in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you take a mixture of dyphristic oil and dissolve that oily matter or use a styptic; or you cleanse that part with some medicines and apply others which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow in which the cannula of the cleanser cannot pass, then gradually widen them with a small iron, and place hot compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum until they are widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices seem wide, then you sew up their lips and leave only enough space for the cleanser to enter.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the limb from which the arm flows is elevated above its attachments, dry it in the lowest place on the patient where the arm flows within, for when the arm is restricted in the depth of its sinew, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinew within the vicinity of the bone in the lowest place as you desire, then pierce and prepare the member so that the arm flows from it lightly according to what you have made ready and without any cause for the restriction of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied to the sinew according to what you wish to extend, applying them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity as to allow for the communication of all the sinew; then, with scissors, cut in the right side of the orifice of the sinew, slightly wider than the orifice of the sinew; and take other pieces of cloth dipped in hot leons according to the extent of the cut, and place them over it, positioning them at a distance from the orifice of the sinew so that the flow of the arm from it is prevented and the cloth is not too bulky.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is over the opening of the sinus, which you massage at all times so that it draws out what is pressed in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if it is infected.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter discharged from the sinus opening has adhered, or formed a strong adhesion, then on certain days (the third day, for example), you loosen the adhesion, and when you remove the plague, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If from the sinus a fine, virulent matter is discharged, then do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it; for healing of it belongs to itself, for some people have late generation of flesh in their wounds, and others suffer the contrary of that.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a bruised or swollen arm is caused by indigestion, then you know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is prolonged, adjust in the drying of medications, for if the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry just as with an ointment that dries up when applied.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last remedy, which is to be used for healing, is to take a drying ointment and dissolve it in warm oil, and apply it over the affected area, just as if you were using any other remedy, and do so with care.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in the same way when there is no swelling, using a drying ointment, taking honey that is thick, and applying it; or taking myrrh and aloe, chopping them up and pulverizing them over the fire, and then laying this on cloth and pressing it onto the affected area; and you should apply the honey that you have noticed has thickened, and sprinkle it over cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times they administer to him long slices of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and chickpea flour and centaury, and use these simples either alone or mixed, grind them and sift the powder over honey which has been collected; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain persists and this treatment does not heal it, then you know that the corruption is in the innards of the patient, and already inquiry has been made into the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as it is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of calluses, corns, and hardened skin on the feet, adding cuts to the finger and its sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Calluses are a condition where the skin of the toe becomes thick and hard, often due to pressure or friction, and they can affect either the hand or foot. When this condition persists and its treatment is delayed, it can lead to an abscess (a localized collection of pus) in the toe, or it may become infected, causing severe pain. The infection can spread internally, corrupting the bones and causing a foul odor. The end of the affected digit may turn black, and the color of the skin becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have done as we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, be aware that you must cut out with a knife all the excess fluid that is forming in the joint and then cauterize the wound nearby, for cautery promotes healing in it.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the joint swollen, and the additional fluid in the joint has already penetrated the tissues, and it begins to ache and pain, then be aware that you must make a slight cut at the angle of the aching joint, and push it open, and cut the flesh easily, and apply over it the appropriate medicine with cauterizing, until all the flesh is removed; and take care to treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	However, if the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is sufficient for healing if the corrupt bone remains in place.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see corrosion and corruption in the area, you will incise it into one of the joints according to its memory, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you experience severe pain in the joint due to inflammation or injury, at the onset of this malady, you should begin by applying a flebotomist's tool to draw out the harmful material, and then carefully clean the nail with an acute spatula vertically from its base, ensuring that the cut does not penetrate into the surrounding flesh, as this would cause even greater pain and potentially lead to the growth of excess scar tissue in that area; subsequently, treat the affected spot to alleviate the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, it should be noted that this condition, which is naturally present in the bodies of many people, varies greatly among individuals; for some, it primarily affects the muscles, for others, it is mainly in the bones, or for some, it is notably in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some of them originate from the inflammation of the joint, while others are inherent to certain joints in the body.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born into this world without knowledge of it will not suffer much, but he who is born with strong joints will be in pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are born carnal, the incision is light, and it is that you insert what must go to its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with the root of the joint, cure is difficult; so beware of his dislocation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In he who is born with such knowledge, take care to begin the incision on his flesh in a rounded manner within the bone, and then use a suitable saw to close it, and tend to that place so that it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that occurs between the joints due to repeated movements or because of the nature of the man who lacks such knowledge, or as a result of a plague or fire, or similar, therefore take care to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets, dipped in warm oil, so that the joints do not become stiff, and separate them with a thin plate of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if it appears that consolidation has occurred in certain parts of the hand, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the understanding of defects, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are thick, wrapped veins filled with melancholic excess fluid that occur in various parts of the body, most commonly appearing on the legs, particularly those of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	So then understand that you should administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their pain is according to two methods: one is to incise and drain that black blood, and the other method is to raise the vein and extract everything.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick blood clot is dissolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, then firmly grasp the patient's thigh at the superior part of the affected area with one hand above it, and incise the vein at one place, or two, or three wide places, and raise the black blood clot using the other hand from below the leg towards the upper part of the affected area until all the desired quantity is extracted, as much as necessary, and the patient tolerates it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then bind it tightly, and order the patient to refrain from hot foods that cause black bile generation.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their legs should be done in this manner: you who support the patient's leg, if it is stiff with pain, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with warm water until it becomes flexible and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised with strong exertion, then bathe it while the member is still warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then, cut the cord at the right of the vein, either in its length or at the very end, or at the lowest part of it, then tie it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then, cut the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you must observe the condition of it, as you would judge that disease which turns to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, having evacuated the vein and cut the cord, you will then examine that white which is the vessel.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert the instrument into the space between that is raised and freed from the cord, and suspend it with a weight of some kind.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another incision approximately three times smaller than the first, and carefully cut the cord away from the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift that one and make an incision from behind in the second section, then extract that one and lift it until it is passed through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the highest or topmost section of all the incisions, ensuring that all are passed through, and then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow the above steps in extracting and lifting, then insert a strong double-threaded needle, tie it off, and extract it, or insert a thread into the space and turn your hand over entirely wherever it is stuck.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut yourself; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it will affect the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once all that is removed, you will place over the infected area a mixture of wine and rosined oil and unrosined oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without torsion in which it is wrapped around parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must make an incision over all the parts of its torsion and at the places where it wraps itself, and then suspend it with stitches until you raise it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein and not to injure it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incident which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of an incision:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharpened like other incisions nor does it have an extremely sharp point so as not to damage the vein; rather, it should be of considerable flexibility, because if it were too thin, it would cut through the vein due to its thinness; we have said this regarding its superfluous thickness.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in hernia cases in Arabic lands and in the hot, dry lands of India with little vegetation and no grass or open spaces.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very little of it is generated in other parts of the body, other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the generation of the hernia is putrefaction that comes from within the body, snakes and worms and scabs and worms engendered between the hernia and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending arrival of the hernia is this: that which happens in the leg, a violent inflammation; then the place becomes swollen; and then the vein begins to emerge from the place of that swelling, which seems torn from the flesh.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the hernia appears, you will see that you must wrap over it a piece of lead of which the weight is equal to that of a dragon. Within this dragon, you will notice and release the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever you see any cause for the hernia to protrude outward, wrap it in lead and note that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the movement persists, you insert a knife into it and wrap the ribbon; do not cut the one that penetrates deeply within, for if you do, it contracts and enters the flesh, causing abscesses and pus in the area, and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is important to treat it gradually and extract it little by little, until it is completely removed from the rear of it, without leaving any cause for its return within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some people have reported its length reaching up to the distance between the hand and the wrist, and I myself have seen it extend to a length of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the process of treatment, insert the blade into the opening in its flesh and pierce through the thick flesh of the body, removing everything inside, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is sometimes seen to have great swellings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and it comes with much pain, and it issues from each painful swelling.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and refer to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine affliction.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This affliction is called bovine affliction in many lands, as it causes great pain in the body and a small worm that is born between the intestines and flesh, spreads throughout the entire body, and eventually breaks the skin, expelling itself.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, so that worms and snakes and roundworms and hookworms occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the joints, it causes a severe pain in them and destroys the joints, and that should be treated immediately.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then you must grasp what is above it and what remains below it with strong compression, and then dry it over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not disturb it, then apply a hot cautery with fire over the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is its corruption by which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it affects the head near the joints, then tighten over the brow with strong pressure, and dry it over it, and extract that; and know that the patient should use purification of their body with medicines evacuating corrupt bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the cutting or incision of a malady.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This malady is called nefritis in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I recommended.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to attend a woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which you pricked with a needle, observing that the swelling decreased accordingly, almost as if it were living silver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then, after removing the pain from that place, you applied pressure to the muscle, and left it for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct the other body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I realized that I had to turn myself around in every way, as I had seen; and I was too amazed at the exchange of him and the speed with which he moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my feet according to that manner, however, I have seen many which astonish me with the pain of being exchanged from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen anything like this in the feet of a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that this was anything but why the woman was of old age, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this state, the sensation of that exchanged wind appears.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retro-cured appearance does not manifest in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with clogged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you wish to cure the patient and they feel pain, do not appear as we have said, then tighten over that area and let it rest slightly and dry on that spot until that heat is reduced, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you cannot find the exact spots, then cure it by drawing out the fluid from the body and by expelling that heat, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of serpents and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in whether they have sharp or blunt tips, or are concave or sound, solid ones; and some have three points, or tongues, or barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it attacks, it is according to two manners: for the primary members are the brain, heart, lungs, bowels, bladder, and others similar; and so when it strikes one of these members and appears to your signs of death, which cause I will relate shortly, then you must avoid extraction of that arrow from those parts where death is that in which the greatest disposition is, and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that and cure the disease.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant is when an arrow strikes in it, and passes through the bone, and there comes out from the base which is over the brain, because of the violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and so strongly is the word cut off, and the voice is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the disease a white humidity resembling powder, and spots like those of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the arrow pierces the heart, so that it is near the left mammary, and you feel a hard cause of pain there, and it is not visible; and strongly feels the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and the flow of dark plague, and chills in the extremities, and fainting, then know that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung, appear as pus of plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are infected, and the patient's condition changes, and great spirits depart, and they require a strong draw of air and frothing.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane in the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, it causes great pain suddenly with strong sighs, and all the muscles of the limbs are not at their best.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, one feels intense pain from the poisoned food, some undigested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a rupture of the plague, or the intestines, or hernia, and there is no hope for the patient's recovery unless the arrow is removed.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and it leaks urine outside, causing pain due to some internal injury, then know that this is a severe condition, a sign of serious illness.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Similarly, the other parts such as the face, neck, and head, shoulders, elbows, spine, hip, leg, and knee, and similar parts of the limbs can be saved with great care when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may understand their use in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that when an arrow enters the tear duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose and is extracted from him in another place, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, then he recovers, and there is no damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had entered into his eye in the grays, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without leaving any trace.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is healed, and there was no bad consequence for his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the gullet, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one to which only ears are attached; and then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the gullet of the patient; and then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and I realized that he was dying from it; so, after we had passed thirty days and nothing had changed regarding his condition, I incised the arrow and treated it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been embedded in his back, and the pain was concentrated on him, and after setting fire to it for some time, I extracted the arrow at the base of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had been embedded in her belly, and the pain was deeply rooted within, without changing her general condition, and the woman did not suffer any inconvenience in her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man whose face is covered with arrows, and the wound is deep, so the arrow is removed without much pain, and many similar marks are seen like these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the arrow was extracted from the man of the king's princes who had been hit in the middle of the nose and had already inclined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the treatment of him, so that within three days the arrow's wound would heal.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; then he inquired about that attempt subtly, and did not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain behind the right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was due to the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Then he applied a plaster to the place with an astringent and digestive effect, trusting that by doing so, the location of the arrow would become apparent to him, so that it would dry up on its own.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not remove the plaster from the wound for several days; and in the meantime, consolidate the disease, breaking the malformation of the hernia through intervals of several days until on one day you feel the arrow inside its sheath and thus successfully treat it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then apply acute, corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opens, and try to ease the pain; carefully remove the tip of the arrow, which sticks to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you should adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visible to me; I devoted four months to this.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then, as the wound became enlarged, I attempted to insert forceps and hold it, without causing further harm, until I found a way using clever means, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter, to extract it with forceps; and thus, I healed that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, so the affliction is solidified and the disease is healed entirely, with no further damage to it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you to consider the quality of extraction of certain arrows so that it provides order and meaning to what I have not mentioned, for the divisions of this art and the definitions of those parts are not understood from the narration, nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisan speaks little about what is present and even less about what is absent; he seeks new operations and novel instruments to understand the descent of foreign causes into the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction towards the place where they enter, or by the opposite of the other force.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy part, and is thrown out and discharged.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, then know that you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it heals and the attraction of it and its discharge are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not adhere to your diet, leave it for some days until the attraction and movement of it cease on certain days, and it is discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your diet for some days, then know that you must puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle depth where the location is enlarged by the arrow, and extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the skull and has pierced one of the brain's cavities, and it causes some of those symptoms you described, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it there for some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone itself but only in the flesh and does not pass into the brain, and the patient recovers after some days without any of those symptoms, then devise a way to remove the arrow and its attachment to the body.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your efforts to remove it, then administer treatments along the arrow's path as we have recommended, and attend to the affected area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the body and affects a particular sense, then probe that area, and if you feel any resistance, use some suitable tools to attract and draw out the arrow.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then make an incision into the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached that must be removed, carefully cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with every tool you can use; and devise a plan, if you cannot remove the flesh from around the auricles when they are broken or twisted, until they heal completely.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow at any location, use a forceps with your hand twisted at all times to make it firm; and employ every subtlety possible so that the arrow is not broken and can be easily extracted along with the tissue.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot access that part during your shift, leave it for a few days until the swelling in the tissue has subsided, and then repeat the procedure when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If blood flow is stopped, do what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And take care to make an incision with precision, whether of a vein, nerve, or string, and use all your ability to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as much as you can for yourself and as advised.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the arrow contract in such a way that the damage corresponds to the shape according to which you need to aim the tip of the arrow, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the shapes.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Consider arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of another party, or those that have already proceeded to the outer parties from within, or make the tip of the arrow limp by feeling the movement beyond the proposed depth and twist it; then focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and shoot it, for it is made light in flight.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, cut your blade according to the angle that the arrow has entered the bone, amplify the cut, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not work, leave it for a few days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the point of the arrow is embedded in it, then push it towards the body.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point has fallen and you want to give impulsion, then insert your finger and, if it is smooth, hit it gently into the concave part of the bone at the base of the arrow and push it towards the body.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the bone, as the arrowhead will be pushed away by the bone.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, you must press all your concave flesh in the place where it truly is, if it is within your power, and treat that part as seems best.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch where it enters, and it is within your power to do so, then press on that point, and be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, extract the arrow, and apply a poultice if needed, and treat the wound until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	A device for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a serrated edge that grips the arrow so it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, large and small, according to the amount of arrow and its hardness, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the swelling.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	A method to force out this concave extremity with pain as if to dislodge the arrow's intrusion from within it and push away that swelling.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method to force out the swollen extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	in such a way with pressure so that the intrusion of it into the concave arrow is dislodged and the swelling is forced away.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, of which there are several, are as follows: there are two pulsating veins close to the ears, called the temporal arteries; two veins visible on each temple; and two veins in the lacrimal bones of both eyes, known as the aspient veins. There is a vein located in the middle part of the forehead and another in the tip of the nose; there are also two veins at the nape of the neck and two veins on the lower lip. These are called the algelic veins, and lastly, there are two veins on the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, there is one cephalica, and it requires wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is deaf, and it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and they call that one the people "the vein of all the body," and the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and they call those common veins "the stomach vein"; and the funis of the arm, it is paused on the fossa, and it is the one where flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the ear through manifest appearance; and salvatella, it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smaller said pus, and only in it are two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is left in the curvature of the end of the wild latz; and the second is superficial, and its location is left by the domestic latz bandage; and the sciatic vein, its place is left by the wild latz bandage; and on the bandage are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is an ancient cure for migraines, emigrations, and ulcers on the head, old maladies.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the method of bleeding them is as follows: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on both sides in the area where the veins are located, close to the ears, in a manner that causes good friction; then tighten the bandage around the head, binding the two areas where the ears are located, which are depressions in the head; and if you wish to do it as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as they say, here is how to try.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the surgical knife, one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the wrist until the incision reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as needed, and make the cut as deep as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, apply strong compresses and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this treatise the incision of these and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are located near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflows in the legs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing a flebotomy on these is as follows: confine the patient's limb until two veins appear under sensation, after which you should carefully probe and determine the pulse below; and then you will know that it is successful.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, you lift the cord above the vein at its insertion as indicated, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument, raising the vein; and cut likewise in the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, you should be close to the patient's hernia, placing the indicated pressure on the vein for an hour, and then pressing over that area and applying poultices and strengthening it with firm compression, leaving it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And previously, the recollection of them has been made, and then the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the release.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for old facial diseases, migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy depends on what you have learned; it is that the illness tightens its collar with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a phleatome, which has this form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the puncture at the prominent point of the phleatome on that vein and strike it with a lean or other tool in the proper manner, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's illness and tighten it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes the vein is opened with a lateral phlebotomy, but it is not appropriate that a phlebotomy be of acute extremity as well as other phlebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and phlebtomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is very close and strong, it would break in the phlebotomy if it were too delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Avoid the jugular veins that are the tears of two wheels due to itching and scurvy in the wheels, and to the illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the disease tightens the vein in a certain place, and then you make a phlebotomy cut there, while standing over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And phlebotomy should be performed according to the transverse direction along a slightly thin phlebotomy cut, as in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is fine, then only the tip of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then drain the blood as much as necessary, and apply pressure on that side, tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and intense sweating, and for facial diseases and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the disease tightens its grip, and then you take hold of the patient's nose with your left hand, take a fine long cut and place it in the middle part of the nose according to straightness, because the vein does not feel here, and because blood begins to flow shortly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure you complete the procedure with your hand on the flebotomy, slowly letting the blood flow according to need; then close it up after a night, as it is restored more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the young of the flebotomy from both sides should be guided towards constriction of veins and beginning of healing and moving towards removal of bad humors and acute and corrosive ulcerations as well with potent remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the illness tightens each one in its place with adhesion; and the practitioner is over the top of the illness, and the patient lies on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then, make a flebotomy on the vein in the long with a sufficient and slow flebotomy; and draw out the blood according to season or as much as necessary for this purpose; and do similarly to the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then carefully disengage the ligament and tighten both veins with a moderate pressure to prevent further complications, and leave it within the bandage until the pain is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the healing of phlebotomy of the veins, it deals with small apths and pustules in the mouth and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are on the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it stops the illness in its track, tightens the vein with a bandage, and then turns back the lips of the wound and inspects each of the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and you can tell them apart by their different colors, for around these parts are smaller black veins; and therefore cut each one with a precise incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt remaining with you, and you do not know which one it is, then understand the incision of the larger one among them, and see if pus manifests from those wounds.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it look like the two veins that are on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	This is often done to cut the two veins that are located on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The veins that are located on the tongue's surface, their treatment involves phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, which is usually located in the neck, and other issues in the throat, such as those affecting the uvula and mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy involves following the disease among your teeth in front of the sun, lifting the tongue, observing beneath it, and looking for veins on one side of the tongue as well as the other; their color will be leaning towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform phlebotomy on each one; be careful not to cut off your hand while phlebotomizing them, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the groin, through which blood usually flows in all men, the flebotomy of them is done according to two ways; either by applying a flebotomy syringe or olive oil with subtlety decreasing; or cutting with a flebotomy knife, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for section, and they are special knives and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the stiffness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of olive oil flebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both the width of it also with times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full proceeding apparently thick, and to those that contain hard clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of smaller diameter and has more delicate ends, suitable for flebotomies of fine veins that contain subtle citric blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the jugular vein flebotomy, one of three veins, is used to extract blood from the sickly conditions that remain after the gullet and collarbone, and also from the chest and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be very careful and cautious, because if he misplaces or adjusts the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding, so it is important not to flebotomize that part with a sharp needle, but rather to use a secant.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basil vein does not appear by clear indication, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to another, or look for a branch of it; or perform flebotomy in its end on the arm, because that one is manifest; and use a secant needle as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, then cover in front of the tightness of the arm that you touch the area until you know the location of the pulse, and then press over it tightly; and bring the arm close and dry the vein by making a concave section for flebotomy as we have said; and be careful not to strike the percussion on any space of the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, with strength the ligament, an inflammation appears in the area that you have pressed tightly, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you press and feel the flow of blood in the flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the pain is subtle, then know that it is from the artery's pain; and then cut and stop the hand over that area for a long time; and soon after, if the pain stops, since the pain has stopped, tighten the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch the patient from the release of their moisture, and be very careful with them, and do not harm them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the gangrenous part does not separate, and it is not appropriate to apply any medicine to it, then you cut into the artery if you see it; for the end of the limb is contracted and the gangrenous part separates; or take a piece of lint, and bind that around it, and strengthen the area over the vein with a descent of plaster within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the gangrenous part is separated, then it is good; otherwise, treat that with the water mentioned before in the recollection of the location of the severed powder flux of gangrene.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of gangrene from them is difficult due to the small location of the plague and the possibility of adhesion in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Regarding the dark vein, flebotomy is beneficial for draining blood from the upper part of the head and leaving it from the rest of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be wary of the flebotomist if they are overly afraid of flebotomy, because there is a nerve involved; then, upon finding the nerve during the flebotomy puncture, stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and it may not heal completely. This nerve causes sensitivity; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not visible, you must pause the flebotomy with which you are cutting, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of flebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and provides relief to ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want to perform a flebotomy with a olive or myrtle flebotomist, it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Yet it is still convenient for you to know that in performing the flebotomy, you must not puncture the head of the lizard too deeply, seek the most suitable location, and do not notice it, if it is not troubled by the initial percussion that precedes the flebotomy on some occasions.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Yet in some cases, the pain is so severe in certain individuals, when not punctured on the first attempt, you should not pay attention to that apothema.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the flebotomy and its complications are also many, which you must consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translates to: "The first [of these] is what you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of the patient, and it is done by making a cut in one of the veins located in the elbow: cephalic, superficial, and basilic; and phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, during meals, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if sooner, after three hours from sunrise on the first day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be administered at any time of night or day, in every hour and every moment, when it is found convenient and necessary.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is important to note that phlebotomy should not be performed on children under twelve years old; pregnant women should not undergo phlebotomy except after the fourth month and before the seventh; and the elderly, those who have already passed sixty years, should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wishes to be freed from any manner of illness, he should cleanse his cavities before a flebotomy with a lion's clister, if there is a significant gap therein, so that the veins do not cast off the excess fluid during the flebotomy of the cavities, which are pure, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not undergo flebotomy without sacred knowledge and fast, nor should they avoid illness or madness until this is remedied by them, nor should they have hydroptic disease, and it is better to fear colic and vomiting, and pain in the belly, and multiplication of cough and labor and exercise during breakfasts or vigils, and any cause that dissipates strength, either in the body or in animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is appropriate to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard, if the pain is severe, from food and drink, and from medicines if it is possible for them to help it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse in a bath if any cause does not forbid or some exercise is performed so that the swelling is reduced.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around 3 o'clock in the afternoon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that foot which is under observation on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is anger, fear, or any physical accidents, especially when it involves excessive work and pain, and resembles those conditions.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bedside, have the causes be present of which corr (possibly referring to a disease or condition) is most common among men, aromatizing and perfuming them, and applying balms and similar remedies according to the possibilities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is clean or rather, the cushion of the one who was just bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the flebotomator two or three times; and tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And whether the compression is firm, so that the compression is not equal, or the compression is excessive, then prevent the flow of the sanc; or it is for softening, and then prevent the complete closure of the sanc's flow.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the compression, ensuring that whoever was to be flebotomated rubs their hands together between their fingers until the veins are inflated and visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the flebotomist should apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy instrument; and they should place their left hand's index finger on the vein, leaving the spot where the flebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein bulges slightly, and the pressure is relieved because when veins are encountered that are tight, one must perform the flebotomy while applying pressure, and if the vein ruptures during the flebotomy, it should be tied off immediately.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be skilled and diligent in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after completing the phlebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little or applying pressure with your hand, if the location is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as strong inflammation can cause severe swelling, nor should you immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and there is a subtle flow of blood, and you fear that you will not get the desired amount, then repeat the phlebotomy on that track according to its rectitude, and adjust the opening slightly, applying pressure with your hand before the location becomes inflamed, because in many cases a slight opening is enough.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Sometimes that already formed ulcer may not heal, do not get discouraged as it does not excuse you from any cause; apply some ointment on any part of the wound, as it soothes the body's suffering.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location than other locations, and all oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil in all flebotomies, by which veins are opened to prevent body suffering, is a well-founded and wise practice when one of those on that site is stopped, as the pain is alleviated and the inflammation is reduced when it is strong.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large ulcer is formed at the site of flebotomy, as it often happens due to various causes, especially when there is no significant blood loss but rather a slight piercing, or in the perception of a thin vein, then you should compress it and apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary that he should do this immediately after the blood from that vein has been collected, or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days there is any discoloration or swelling, do not notice it; and if you wish, apply a mixture of aloe, myrrh, dissolved in a vinegar, or mint juice, or a similar remedy to that place.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And sometimes accidents occur, requiring amputation of the affected limb or surgical incision of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on it, and if you feel any tenderness, you should apply compression to that area; for the swelling is a sign of an evil and bad condition; and so be careful to avoid applying pressure on any of the causes we have mentioned, as strong blood flow comes from the saninary artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area of tightness, so that the place is healed, and take care of the other treatment until it is cured.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the dominant color appearing on the skin.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the blood is black, leave it to settle until it becomes clear; and if you draw it off when it is thick, leave it to settle until it becomes thin; and if it is raw, then stop its flow until the sharpness of it subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of him who is full and strong and requires blood extraction at once; in this case, enlarge the vein cut and make the cuts wider.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for him who is anxious, do the opposite; and when extracting blood in several stages, make the cuts narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best way to perform vein phlebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where syncope occurs after phlebotomy, it is customary to treat that immediately after phlebotomy with a small amount of wine infused with millepedes or simply diluted oxymel; and remove the blood in three or four draws.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a chill from the extraction, then take something to infuse before phlebotomy with myrrh or honey-based elixir scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or an aromatic and strongly-scented elixir.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by a great deal of blood loss, then take something to drink with beef blood and a mildly-scented elixir; and use the aromaticity of fennel seed, and apply a cold compress to your feet at that area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the abscess a second time, addressing the part from which the phlebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and its virtue is hot, which evacuates the small abscess little by little, according to the amount of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May he who wishes to extend his arm and discharge his abscess a second time, and his body is strong, do this about seven or eight hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	He who wishes to discharge the abscess from his body in the opposite direction of the decline to which it inclines, should have it extended on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	He should pay particular attention to a body in which there is much pain, heat, and fever, where the abscess should be discharged at once, with a considerable quantity of bloodletting, so that the perception becomes intense before fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions for phlebotomy; and he who places his hand on the pulse of the body containing the abscess, to prevent death from syncope, is particularly attentive, as he should be when the phlebotomist is inexperienced or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And be careful when you want to free the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Next, apply a second technique if the first one is not effective; or use a sharp instrument to open the vein at the site of clotting; or place a hot pad or a cold compress lightly over it until the blood is completely drained.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no other option, draw the blood from that area or from the other arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in the place of the cubital or basilic vein when they are not found or are occluded, since it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the doctor inserts his hand into the patient's arm until the vein becomes inflamed and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that stricture with a gentle hand; and phlebotomize according to the transverse small cut, not longitudinally or transversely.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be an open view, and your phlebotomy should be such that you phlebotomize on the joint of the hand with a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then insert your hand into the patient's arm and prevent the blood from running in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the wound in cold water is most at rest.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is far more safe than all other veins, for it has neither pulsating blood nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vena cava on the right side is indicated for liver afflictions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand strongly on it, as you have placed it in cold water, provided the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then make a transverse incision; and if you puncture it from top to bottom, it will not bleed again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to cut off your hand during phlebotomy, for it contains the nerves of the dita exposed by the skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening, and ensure that you do so carefully on every part of the wound.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of this arteriotomy with the hand from the left side is appropriate for the ailments of the right side as well.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with this arteriotomy as well, just as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the healing of the superficial vein from this arteriotomy is for ailments that are in parts farthest from the body, just as there are ailments of the pelvis, and to retain menstruation, and for ailments of varicose veins and ulcers on thighs and old socks, and similar ones to these ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the disease pushes its foot into water and makes friction until the veins appear; then it ties over the joint of the foot with a strap; and the place where the vein is visible, the pus appears, and from there it branches out in various parts of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, phlebotomy should drain the pus widely and leave the cushion over the vein after the addition of him, as it is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are left over in the face of the foot, and place your phlebotomy carefully where you cut through it from the side, just as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be swift with your phlebotomy.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	You should not forbid the emission of the sanium (a term for blood or pus); then you immerse the foot in water and let the sanium flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist misses on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy in another place, since the area is sore; and do not fear any ill effects, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems to work similarly on the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for sciatic vein, the area as we have said is below the knee at the attachment of the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the incision of phlebotomy on him is at hip pain when it is done with a sharp cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the effectiveness of phlebotomy on him is that the patient's illness enters a bath, quickly and thoroughly draining his body from the ankle to the thigh with a long, thin instrument, so as not to leave any traces.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, you perform an incision on that part according to each method at your disposal and as is most appropriate; either cutting through incision or severing through sectioning, since the site of it is exposed.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many people very painful; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the feeling of all, perform an incision on a branch of it, and that is the one that appears at the back of the foot instead of the aforementioned great toe and little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and allow blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the tightness and place your hand over the site of the incision as it strengthens the area, for gently it is healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The windows are of glass, or iron, or crystal.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is performed in two manners: one through lancing and extraction of pus, and the other through ventilation by means of lancing.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventilation, which is through lancing, is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are administered through lancing and extraction of pus are in twelve places on the body, of which one is where ventilations are paused, and it is the last opening on the head; and two openings from each side of the nape; and ventilations under the jaw, leaving the mandible below the mouth; and ventilations of two blades; and ventilations of two holes, each in two bracelets; and ventilations of two pins; and ventilations of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of blood should not be done only from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered that bloodletting be done with fire or a burning in any illness caused by accumulation within until the body is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If bloodletting is necessary for an illness or a continuous condition, it should be administered at the beginning and end of each month, and in the middle of its course as well, and at any suitable time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of which is that in men, the blood increases in places where bloodletting is needed and finds great severity and hardness; and from these, he observes accumulation and inflammation on their face and head, and in their eyes; and from these, he sees puffiness on their face and forehead and darkness and weakness in their feet; and from those who spill the place of their bloodletting; and from these, their laughter increases; and from these, he tastes blood in his mouth or that his tongue is covered with blood; and from these, their sleep increases, and from those who vomit blood while sleeping, rigor, ants, and other similar plagues.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when, due to any of those conditions, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the night, the doctor orders ventilation to be done rather than waiting two or three hours after midnight.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate ventilation of the neck consists in applying pressure to the head, causing it to sink into the pillows; this is more effective when it involves the evacuation of all the body's fluids.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is performed at the site of phlebotomy in the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of a putrid or catarrhal nature, as it brings great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, one should not use those things on the feet, and especially on the tops of the toes, where there are joints that are prone to pain.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is lying on that which is continuing to press upon him experience relief; and for this reason, you must command the ventilator to place his hand with a slight pressure on the areas where the pressure is greatest, lest there be generation of loss of sensation.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The application of the bellows over the chest is in place of phlebotomy of the deep vein and the basilic: and thus it confers relief from asthma, and from constriction of the air passages, and from the cracking of the lung's air sacs, and from cough, and from congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it should be noted that the application of the bellows over the chest should not be prolonged, for if it is left in place for too long, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of the bellows over the head confers relief from accidental pains in the head and eye, and migraine, and pressure, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be sure to instruct the ventilator not to press his hand during the incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The ventilation should be done by applying alcohol to the mouth, and it helps in the healing of gum corrosion, resembling other diseases that occur in the mouth, and is used instead of phlebotomy for drainage from the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation done on both cheeks provides a cure, which is achieved by applying heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation within the two cavities provides immediate relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cefalic, as it draws blood from all those hand-sized veins in the flesh, and the smaller veins that are connected to the larger ones, so as to achieve the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the bellows-maker not to overdo the scraping, for the place is denuded of flesh, and leaves only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows used to blow over the anus and confer relief to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to pus ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should instruct the bellows-maker to use a strong bellows made of iron, for the place needs a robust section; and it tolerates only strong, sharp blows from the bellows and subtle scraping.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the bellows from the legs should be reduced in size for precise use, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and relieve old pains of the kidneys and bladder, and menstruation, and open obstructions, and stand in place of two incisions, and of a noose, and two pins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these remedies weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (or 'ventozas') of the abdomen, the healing is proper for the healing of the openings on both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning visible and sucks by a temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the openings, rather leave those lightly, and maintain those tightly, so that the humors come to the place by equal event.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the sore appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then cut and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender skin on his legs, be sure to make an incision once and not again, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bellows to increase the depth of the incision and then slightly pull, and facilitate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the wound is great, then make two incisions, for the first incision opens the way for drainage of the wound and its pus.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large wound.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is very foul-smelling, then make a third incision so that you may achieve the last result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we wish to extract the wound little by little or a small one, it suffices for us to make an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a hard stone, we make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we should make a cut for a broad incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarificacio" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is very large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places for the suckers should be made softer, wider, more open, and smooth; if it's in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or crushed almond oil, or henna seed oil; and if it's winter, use butter, or lilac oil, or chamomile oil, or st John's wort oil, similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, sticky, then use oil of amber, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the blister poultice is made of thick flesh, it should be prohibited from using oil, and at these places where blisters form on their bodies, the blistering should be washed with warm water or with water mixed with salt, or with dog's urine, or with vinegar, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those whose blisters have a lot of moisture, wash them with wine or with water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excess fluids are thick, wash their blisters with old wine or with water of sage, which is majorana, or from the distillation of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be noted that blister treatment should be avoided immediately after a bath; it is recommended to administer it just before or after the bath for about an hour or two, and that the blister should be kept elevated while sleeping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venesection?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has undergone flebotomy is irritable and has severe pain and inflammation, then you must consider causes of coldness, such as milia (small white lumps), and apply things that have a cooling effect, such as vinegar, aloe, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And limit their diet to things like chicken, lean meats, and foods seasoned with spices.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they must take in plenty of warm almond milk, or milk made from hemp seeds, and sumac, and drink things with a mild odor between meals and at night; and it is recommended that they consume little to no wine, avoid foods like chicken, duck, and small game, and limit their intake of pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is important that on days of ventilation and phlebotomy, the beverage be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is important to provide a beverage to some people with typhoid fever or other ailments, such as musk, which is cinnamon or alcelita before ventilation or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is relieved; and they should not take that scald.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the vents that are a form of sacrifice should be vents that are stopped at the liver, and on the abdomen and podagra, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the drainage of the wound, because these members do not suffer sacrifice upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those who only attract the pain of a member, thus pausing a ventosa on the nipple in the case of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that for the ventosa to dissolve the adhesive viscidity of the member, just as with a pause over the stomach and navel; because it rarifies the member and scalps it and removes pain as it resolves ventosa.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed over the hemorrhoids when they occur in their position or lying down, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the hemorrhoid and eradicates its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to be placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are managed with suction, sometimes only, and in some cases, they are administered over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times, they are administered full of heated water in the ailments of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation be filled and great pus be formed, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the poultice applied over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy should be the size of a palm; and in the length of it, at the place that is in the middle, the size of a third part, the thickness should be small according to the amount that fits inside it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use ery or citrus, with thick, soft edges, to hold the member in its proper position without causing injury.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a transverse strip of ery or iron, where the candle is held over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this poultice is much greater in effect than that which we have mentioned before, and its effectiveness is less for some ailments and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the strength of the suction cups on children and the weak is different from the suction cups on young people and robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the technique for applying this suction cup over a member is to extend the mechanism over a fire with decent fuel before a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse branch in the exact spot of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the periphery, preventing damage to the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And once it is applied to the patient's member, as we have mentioned, when using suction cups and not requiring the said technique, and the heat of the fire causes steam to form over that track, the suction cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And adjust the mechanism according to your preference, and repeat if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	It is possible to use a suction cup on pleurisy patients without the presence of transverse branches or tracks, and it should only be filled with water and applied over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this funnel, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	**Chapter XCVII**
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in all members but only in those where it is impossible to place ventosas (cupping glasses) due to their smallness, such as the tongue and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments, which are in the infected waters of putrid wounds.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is advisable to lay them (the instruments) in infected water during the day and night until they are familiar, and do not cause any pain in the abdomen of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleubotomy and cupping glasses; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place them upon it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and bound.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the area with an incision, it is more beneficial in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar and then apply a hot compress; it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the swelling of the veins is prolonged and it persists, then you should immerse a cloth in cold water and place it over the affected area to stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the swelling is multiplied, then vitriol powder or substances similar to those with constricting properties should be applied to it, as long as the swelling subsides; or certain seeds of peas should be placed over the affected area, and left there until the peas adhere to the location and the swelling dissipates.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary, apply bloodletting, when possible, change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is forbidden, then rub the place with fresh salt or leave a needle in the place until it heals; and once they are healed, then gradually reduce them, as those who feel any pain will soon give up.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some aloes powder, or salt, or ash on them and then it will soon happen.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of recovery from the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mentioned frequently in the art of medicine; it's about restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people and those who at any time did not study the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it is said that this manner of knowledge on earth in our time is private; and you should never forget it for any length of time; and I have not devoted myself to it until now, except through the long study of ancient books and the understanding of those times, from which I extracted science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have dedicated myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have conducted my experiments; so that you will find it concise with regard to the topic of elongation and freed from troublesome occupation; I have abridged it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it through examples at the conclusion of declaration; and I have formed in it various forms of the instruments that are administered at that time, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First principle.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	In summary, and as a collection of fractures of the bones, those which must be identified first before we begin to recall the memories of the injured parts and their varieties, each one for itself.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	So, let us begin with the preamble of this chapter by stating the sums of speech; and the chapters to those whose understanding, at the outset, the artisan is forced and obliged to remain true to these—it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so it is said, when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or misalignment, you must first consider whether to begin with an amputation or removal of that part, or in most cases, if no other cause prohibits, with the use of virtue, or as the situation demands, either by making an incision into the flesh, or through cauterization, or by using a stick (viel) on the decrepit, or at times, due to a violent heat or friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then I am content with my own diet of dried herbs, chicken and crab meat; I forbid fatty meats and overindulging in foods, as well as any food that fills the veins with rust, provided you are careful to avoid gangrene and if not, fear the emission of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original condition, from which they usually recover.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be healed, you should know that the patient must refrain from foods that are too rich in nutrition with a lot and heavy food, but rather make foods prepared with warmth water, rice, bread, meat, veal, fresh fish, large beans and similar, and this treatment brings about the coagulation of the fracture more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones break when they are in men as well as in the very old, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature because of the withering of the members of their bodies.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continue according to their nature for as long as those members are withered, and they continue and consolidate those that are of their own in the end of slowness, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and amends regarding a broken bone from any cause similar to gout in which swelling occurs and adheres, strengthening and binding together what is usually separated, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, or any cause that does not prohibit it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures varies according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now, let's proceed with the line-by-line translation:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures require different treatments.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diverse species of bone fractures in their innards; for some are arcuate fractures or what happens in them stars; and sometimes it is a fracture according to the length of the bone: such as stag and shoulder fractures and additional procedures and non-procedures, as is done in pain when preparing to write, and fracture by plague and dislocation in the head, and small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own peculiar or tormentous restoration according to the recollection of its distinct place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A clear sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how bone fracture is known: the curvature of it, and that prominence and perception from touch, only when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no sign of deformity nor does the patient experience great pain upon touching the bone with agitation, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformity or a small fracture, where you do not know how much pressure to apply with your hand; once identified, place over it the remedies of which you have memory suitable for the moment and location; then, make it very tight by applying subtle compression.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the location, when it is curved and does not split into two or anything else that does not happen in stages, as the entire part of its comparison is affected, then you must begin from your hour to rectify the curvature once it occurs post-injury with caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it develops into an acute post-injury infection, then leave it for a few days until the infection subsides; and then use any method of elevation and engineering that you can to help it heal.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and stitching of an intestine is more delicate than the bone in which it has burst.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second one when the recall of the intestine comes.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is broken in such a way (as if) it has two injuries, whether in the hand or foot; or if your hand holds a small member; or if there are two sutures or one suture and a hand, then extension of that severed limb is necessary.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position on which to hold the member in accordance with its natural shape, while the separations are extended from the severed limb, then pierce so as to cause those additions to return to their proper places, using whatever means you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that your force does not harm the patient during your operations, nor cause any injury; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure that at this opportune moment you apply your hand to it, and if you perceive any different cause, correct it and overcome it with the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression; indeed, such foolish doctors often cause gangrene by their operations, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen this happen through the operations of their moted devices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then attach, achieve proper alignment and a decent operation with stricture of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him/her avoid that in the hour of their vigils and sleep, and observe his/her revolution and agitation, and you must take charge of it all, and pay attention to every one of his/her movements with all your virtue; wait until the position of the member is such that it is assured from pain, which is caused when he/she feels in the disposition of the position of the member pain or injury; at this moment, be aware that you change its position to another where there is no pain; and be careful that the position of it is straight and aligned, so that no torsion happens to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members broken are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And regarding those that are small like the arm and have a delicate bone structure, when you see that the envelopment should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thick like the skin or leg, it is necessary that their wrapping be soft and durable, as the binding on each side connects the large member and tightens it from every direction, so nothing interferes with its movement.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, carefully remove your bandage, place a suitable padding over it, around the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to the member's needs; and tighten your hand slightly on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then carefully withdraw it from the superior part of the fracture site, and tighten gently to ensure you do not force your contraction on the area you have strengthened around the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gradually lengthen the wrapping around the fracture site, and gently ease the contraction slowly, until you obtain from the area a considerable space.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it around the weakened area over the fracture, and carefully withdraw the bands further from the fracture; and your operation should be on the contraction of the bandage and its softening according to what we have said about the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the bandages a leather pad or cloth to which the curvature of the fracture is adjusted, if there is curvature in it; otherwise, do not place anything in it for no reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand over the other side, and cover these gently wrapped folds properly made, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that area, and pause on it where the abscess lies and presses upon the inflammation; leave it for some days, and then tighten the bandages over it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of different types of canvas, carefully made; or of wooden splints; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the bandage placed over the fracture is thick and wide at the edges compared to the other bandages; its length should be according to the measurement of the limb in terms of magnitude and smallness; then tighten the bandages on the other side as per your initial tightness; then tie them tightly from above as we have said regarding the tightness, and it must be that your tightness is based on the location of the fracture more, and the tighter it is away from the fracture, the better.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And take care that the threads are stronger in thickness and fineness, and are many; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in certain operations where the thread of cords from some tissues is tight, it is a great error when the constriction is not uniform.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And indeed, thin threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the constriction that you want, and you will not realize that there should be less than a finger between one thread and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the illness is localized in the extremities of the bones, then apply constriction at those sites, placing cushions or something similar between the joints to prevent any injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fractures are as harmful as an epidemic, causing disruptions in the body and leading to recall according to the second rule of singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately strapped with splints on the first day; this is because, when a limb is large, it cannot be immobilized by splints until several days later, or perhaps after 3, 7, or 15 days, depending on your experience in preventing gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting as a quick means of restoring fractures, particularly suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, since it does not allow heat or friction: take flour dust, which is the core of flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that is not possible, then use a thin and delicate piece of wood, and arrange it as needed.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is extracted from the bark of the tree milgraner, with all kinds of dragon's blood; mirra and aloe also in dragon's blood; alcohol in dragon's blood twenty times; mix all these ingredients well with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's condition is scarlatinous; then apply this plaster, for it is a good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster, which gives relief to fractures and twists: prepare migrain and add white alder bark in dragon's blood ten times; myrrh and aloe also in dragon's blood five times; acacia in dragon's blood six times; and bol armenic in dragon's blood twenty times.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients are crushed in a mortar to a fine powder and mixed with water or egg albumen and administered accordingly.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of plastering joints and bones separately from their locations, causing accidental pain in those and in cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not only without restorative power but also serves to prevent abscesses and expel pain effectively.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores blocked bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppies, both wild; mix them together to make a plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of quick plastering applied for the restoration of fractured bones and when you wish to achieve resolution of an abscessed rupture: take roots of alder, chamomile flowers, violet petals, all flour, mix them together; grind them in wine, if the affected member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that which soothes with cold water moistened with colander or cold water itself.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a poultice for stronger resolution than the first one mentioned: prepare a mixture of althae root and seeds, fennel, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, any other herbs; all should be finely chopped and steeped in sage water or lukewarm water or wine, according to the condition of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not state in his work that it is necessary to place a poultice directly on the affected member for its restoration, but rather recommends applying it between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A Gaul may also apply poultices to the affected member after restoration, and the causes of its dryness require applying warmth as with myrrh, hops, and similar herbs, just as has been recommended for other conditions.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of honey, moss from trees, human hair or eagle's feathers, and salt, mix them together, strain and make it into a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to how much the ligament is stretched and, once separated, it is important to consider if there was no pain or discomfort and the bone was not broken, in which case it is not necessary to dislocate it completely. You should not force the dislocation with too much effort.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if a severe pain, pressure or swelling occurs at the site, you should immediately remove the plaster from that area and stop the treatment.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, soak it in hot water, and apply this to the area until the pressure and pain cease, then let the member rest for an hour. Then place over it a clean cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, wrap it up, and leave it for the night, ensuring there is no further infection and the swelling of the member subsides and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that narrow restriction and apply a small plaster, not tightening it with your first constraint, but applying subtle remedies to what needs healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have already subsided, and the patient is in need of a plaster and restrictions, then repeat that process as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs in the member from any of those we have mentioned, do not remove the plaster for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, as it seems appropriate to you, due to the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and if it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the restrictions more than in your initial restriction, and adjust the diet of the patient according to the progression of their recovery.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture and find it dry and shriveled, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that part; so you should immerse that in hot water each time you treat it; and do this for all three days; ease the tension a little, and by this operation, the nourishment flows to the member, and healing begins slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what these foolish restorers of a member's fracture do when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it was covered, and is restored according to its deformity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon here, he would open up old scars in their free spaces and heal them towards this.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is much more reasonable that they do not do this.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, as the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that shatters all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone fragmented, as it were in a fist; this type is thus called 'ascial'. Or, a space may cut through some part of the bone, slicing through the flesh and not penetrating to the rear of the bone; this type of fracture is known as 'levatio absoluta'.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain from these two types of fractures can be severe or mild, and they may be caused by compression or tension; their cause is a blow or sudden impact upon a hard surface, and they resemble each other in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture either penetrates and approaches the pancreas, leaving the bone fragmented; or it occurs on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two types of fractures can be severe or mild.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a fracture that is damaged in the bone, at the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture caused either by an accident or by the impact of a heavy object, which causes some bone layers to separate inside, and it occurs in the concave area as happens with the fractures of the skull when there is a blow to the head and their separation from the internal cavities.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is most commonly found in the bones of children, such as the skull.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And in all these types of fractures, the bones are separated as if they were stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then you come to the recollection of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have learned all these types of fractures by observing their symptoms and attempting to discern the damaged and rotten flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the special capillary is known for being discovered over the bone, and it is cleaned, and washed over it, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of the illness, and if you examine the accidents that signify by their appearance over evil, thus as vomiting of anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and muteness, and fainting, and acute fever, and bleeding of the eyes and redness of those, and similar to them in the major dispositions, it is a sign that one is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you observe unusual accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is that if the pain has come to you at the beginning as it does and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the bone's outline according to all dispositions on the fourteenth day.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then you must know that you should examine the bone against the seventh day, because what remains of the bone is corrupted by panniculus, and accidents happen that we have mentioned before.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and is in small and torn pieces, then you must know that you should incise the comminuted and torn part as I have mentioned before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you remove the patient's thigh pain, and discover the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the figure of the pain, and let it rest over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you experience a fracture of the bone, pus or abscess cauterize it carefully, rest against it with something that covers, and fill the space with bandages soaked in wine and rubbed oil, and allow the abscess to calm down until the pus has ceased, and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is the second of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One method is to cut the bone with a sharp incisor in a straight line, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the first one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the incisor even wider than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you will need to use various incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter, the last ones being most sharp and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their help to facilitate the percussion over the incision so as not to harm the head or wound that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, remember to pierce in the circumference of it before you apply the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus, but rather those that do not extend the term of the bone of the skull to which it is attached, so that at the incision, its extreme or edge is round, or like a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, as each one suits the specific nature of every bone, provided that in all parts of the skull, its edge be sharp, and the amount in length and breadth be according to the quantity of specific nature of this skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three types of treatments: When drilling into the channel of a broken bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and rotate it within until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the treatment instrument to another location, and stop when it has passed through all the layers, taking care to adjust its position according to the thickness of the ray or surrounding area.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with scissors what is between any part of the bone, creating a thin opening over it according to levitation, as we have said, in order to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool that you have prepared for this purpose, using forceps and thin saws.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to take every precaution so that the scissors do not touch any part of the patient's body.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So, once you have drilled through the bone and it is separated from the surrounding tissue if it continues to attach, you will extract it, taking care to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone with a tool similar to scissors, but nonetheless be sure that it is more delicate and finer than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you fracture any small bones or joints, take hold of it with ease through what you have at hand for instruments; then apply a poultice to the wound with linseed and ointment as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another manner of operation is light, free from pain, which cuts Gaul and praises for great merit; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, while you have discovered that part, stop leaving the end of this cutting instrument slow and gentle, of which this is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts forward in length, so it should be adjusted to the shape of the face of the instrument cutting acutely into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the instrument against a cut made in one part with a small hammer, until you have completely cut through the bone, while it is revolving, and be sure of the safety of the patient from any accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their illnesses; certainly, he would have been asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a fracture occurs due to some external cause affecting the panniculus (skin and subcutaneous tissue) in certain bone locations, the doctor will incise it with a curved scalpel at that point, and release the pressure from it easily, as it is released from its discomfort and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate through the panniculus, and what has detached or remained from the bone is the facia (deep tissue), rough and subtle fibers, then you should smooth those roughnesses and eradicate those subtle fibers with fine razors that you have prepared in sufficient quantity to be able to apply them at any point to these pus deposits in a manner suitable for your operation on that fractured bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should manage in your reasoning when you begin to cut the bone with these razors, and use them close to the subtle pus, and do not stop doing this continuously until you have administered the divine pus and the subtle pus from all of these.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Place a small capillary and delicate fracture in each of the other breaks, make sure to administer treatment according to what you need for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all who have studied that art are skilled in it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us now focus on what we have written regarding great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicul (fatty tissue) is contracted when you remove the bone, make sure to take a cloth from it according to the size of the wound, dip it in warm oil and place it over the wound; then take another cloth, either doubled or tripled, dip it in hot wine and oil, and place that over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to harm the patient; and finally, apply a lat (likely a type of poultice) over it, and do not bind it tightly unless the wound is very large.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let this treatment continue for one or two days until you are certain of the safety of the poultice; then remove it and administer medications that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of herbs, powder of roots and aristology, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this powder from the aforementioned medications, which is sprinkled on the affected area after they have dried; and generally, administer to the patient all medicine of good quality from which he abstains and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be mindful according to your virtue that the plague in your treatment be clean; and let there be no impurity of ointment or other; nor do you add severity to it; for when it is applied to the panicle of the brain, it corrupts and kills it, and brings about a severe malady to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the brain, when it is purified and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether, in the case of the patient, the accidents we have mentioned occur, knowing that it is detrimental to all skill.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If a blackness does not occur from the medication that is placed on it, but rather from the virtue of that medicine that causes that blackness, then you should take some honey and ground oil in small amounts, and with those linements wrap it over the affected area; and then apply cure with the spices for treatment that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	It appears that the text you've provided is a part of a medical treatise from the Middle Ages, written in a language akin to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's continue with the translation:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken in one place but rather in two or sometimes in several instances, where each fracture involves a bone, since there are two bones inside it; the break does not occur directly, but results from laceration, torsion, and inflammation.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two fractures occurs, then you must insert a small instrument into his nose and use the same to stabilize that fracture from inside; likewise, use another instrument to stabilize it from outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your convenience; be careful not to cause any additional harm during your treatment of the patient's illness.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the said part does not allow access to it, then you must equalize the pressure at the edge of the wound where the swelling has occurred.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should do it like this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And on the first day after the fracture, attempt to restore it if possible; otherwise, apply heat or cold treatment for seven days to the affected area with caution.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Then insert a piece of cloth from silk or linen into the nose's opening, if the fracture is in one part, or use two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, ensuring they are as wide as needed to fill the nasal cavity completely.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	He has also recommended some ancient restorative methods where the pieces should be soaked in a border and changed daily, but not visible to me; eventually, I learned that the piece should be dipped in an egg white mixture with flour powder, and then placed inside until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, a foreign body may be lodged in the nose, where it should not be, causing pain from the underlying fracture, and preventing breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this treatment is not necessarily required; and if you wish, you can do it, and if you prefer, you can use cold applications.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another complication occurs after applying the poultice, apply a new one to the nose using wax or a cloth dipped in hot oil or vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If the poultice does not cause a complication, then cover it with a paste made from sesame flour and powdered cloves mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it, but do not press on the nose.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or shattered, then you must carefully remove them with appropriate instruments; and with the cut, apply a cure to it that is nourishing and consolidating, and use suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a plague occurs inside the nose, you must treat it by applying hot compresses and administer silver tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter IV**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**On the Restoration of the Mandible When Cracked.**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not a severe one, pay attention to whether the break is only on the outside, and not split into two parts, but curved inward at the site of the fracture. In this case, its healing will be light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so, if the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your little finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth to support it; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the little finger of your right hand; and gently push with that finger to reduce the fracture inward while supporting the outer part of the bone with your other hand. Do this carefully so as not to cause further damage.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, you must then administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment so that its position can be established.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If there is a loss of teeth due to disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will heal using gold or silver or silk thread; and place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and a large, well-made gauze bandage appropriately tied, or a single piece of guaze the length of the mandible; and then secure it from above according to your ability with the ligature, as long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be quiet, and abstain from eating or drinking anything excessive.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you will cut and separate it; and correct what has already been altered, and apply a poultice of flour, or albumen, or sesame seed meal, since you will have removed the cerot from it, and place a hot compress over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once this annex and the dressing are in place and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless you cause it to dislodge until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for this fracture tends to heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if, another time, a severe abscess occurs, then apply what we have said about the treatment of this abscess until it heals, and the abscess will be removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe one, then consider whether it is a separation of bone or a dislocation, and you must subtily manipulate those dislocations with what seems appropriate for the removal of those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the fracture is too narrow, then you should amplify it with a flébotomi according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have maintained those positions and they no longer cause pain, then with the instruments of the plague if it is wide, apply to it one of the plasters that suits it best until it heals.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text you provided is a mix of different medical practices and instructions from a medieval period, written in a language resembling Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The section you shared seems to be about treating a specific condition, possibly related to joint pain or gout, based on humors (body fluids) and using various medical tools like cauterization and plasters.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork when it is bitten.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the muscles tear the fork (or bone) from its attachment in front, the fracture is usually caused in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	In each case, the fracture is either completely broken off, separated, or divided into two parts that do not occur simultaneously; it is more difficult to restore it; or it occurs in such a way that there are complications, making restoration difficult.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for that operation, when the fracture is its most complicated, you should have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork in place, while the other stretches the muscle to release the tension on the broken bone.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then compress the fracture with the hands until it takes the shape required, not leaving any bulges or hollows.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, wait until the patient stops struggling, and place a piece of cloth or woolen thread under their pressure point; adjust its length according to your need, extend and raise the fork, and tighten it in your hand as they swallow the pain according to what is necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to grasp the parts outside, as it has reached the limit, wait until the patient tilts their head, and place a cushion over their neck, supporting on a larger muscle with a smaller pillow.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press on the muscle around the parts still inside while lifting the fork's end towards the fracture, ensuring it is aligned with the bone in its proper place; then, you correct the fracture and hold it in place until it heals.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any jagged edges of the fork and they are painful, then cut them away and extract the jagged parts to make it easier.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, you will make an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument that serves to grasp, aside; and this is the form of the instrument:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles a cup in which this is the concavity; and its size will depend on what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the depth of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; as it has two ends, one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the rupture of the plague that you have made when extracting the bone fragment is wide, and it is safe from infection, then you will adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the rupture is minor or you fear a post-operative infection, use clean bandages and poultices according to the amount of the wound's separation.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an infection occurs after surgery, apply clean bandages with hot oil and vinegar, and place them over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the pain and swelling of the bone fracture are severe, apply a paste made from ground flour and egg albumen, place it over the wound, and secure it with a leather bandage. Then, if needed, take some honey, which is a remedy used by the Saracin people; it should be of medium length and width, about one palm or so. Apply double poultices over the wound and the paste, and then wrap a thin table knife around it in the area of the fracture. When turned upside down, the honey and bandage must not touch the patient's clothes. Reduce the bandage as the fracture's stricture improves, and this is what should not be overlooked.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the bone does not become completely dislocated; and so that you may see the injury each day, when the ligament softens or you see the star already reduced, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then you should restrain the patient's sleep on their back, and each night place a small cushion under their thigh to elevate it above the level of the heart, so that the support of the thigh is raised from the side, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated with regard to the muscle; or the arm of the patient bent at the elbow.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless it occurs in the vicinity or abscess within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the bandage if you see that it has become loose for him, adjust the tightness and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is healed and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the most in 28 days, and in some cases in some men it is done in less than that time.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of it, but it is not completely shattered, only the edges are damaged.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the lateral part is broken—and it is broken in the middle part of it—it is not known only by touch, but according to the figure of the fracture, you must force its preparation and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place a powder made from bone meal and honey on the wound; also use a powdered cloth, duplicated; and place a thin sheet of table over it according to the quantity of the spatula, or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a stopgap and return the sheet to its proper position.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it firmly over the tongue of the hernia, using constriction and the stability of the sheet so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the tension each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the sheet if it moves from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient still on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula will be restored in 10 days or 25th (day).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the tension, and you will know for certain that it is one of the bones from which the hernia originated, without fear or concern about its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a chain there, then you split it open and hold it, and act as we have said in the fracture of the tailbone of the saddle with cautery if this should happen.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A broken foot sometimes breaks in the middle part and it takes time to heal; but the ends of the bones may knit together, though they are crushed and splintered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And one of the accidents when the middle part of the foot is broken is that it inclines to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is manifest within the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be positioned between their shoulders; then press the muscles, adjust the ribs to the two costates, and perform the operation with subtlety in accordance with every manner possible and appropriate for this, so that the bone structure returns to its original form.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a fine sheet of sage or calamine, resembling a drape, and wrap it around the broken bone without causing further harm; gently bend the splint towards the back several times, and tighten it with due care; constantly consider the splint throughout the process, and when it softens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of the bone due to corrosion, pressure, pain, or abscess in the area, then cut and remove the splint, eliminate the plaster, and correct what has occurred through the means of healing; reduce the plaster as needed; and adjust the stricture until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly, but in places where they attach to the spine; and the ends of their joints, from which they depart, do not cause any pain to those parts except through their cartilaginous nature.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not concealed from your senses, as you inquire into him with your eyes.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is such that it heals the fracture as well as possible, according to its nature, by swallowing it, and then applying a plaster and strengthening the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the parts within, it causes severe pain and piercing for the patient, just as piercing occurs to one who has pleured, and because of this, the bone puts pressure on its veil; it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of very bitter mucus; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And ancient remedies are ingeniously designed for that evil disease.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them, it is said: cover that which prevents food from the malady that generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is pushed out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should avoid this in order that it does not cause a slight delay in generating a cure, if it happens; and if it already has happened, then help is at hand.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also said that certain remedies should be applied to relieve the pain and then suck out with strength; it is similar to reasoning, but nevertheless, there is fear that the wind may push away the excess due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also said: cover the place with cloth that has been immersed in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, making a seal as you wrap it according to its shape; and thus it is cured of malady from food and by pleurisy, both internally and externally.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the disease causes severe constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the patient; then cut away over the affected area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand above it to preserve the integrity, remembering the procedure, and cut through the bone easily, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if the two lips of the wound are large, they should be sewn together, and then treated with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and insert dust in olive oil and place it over the area; this will cure the disease within the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it is recommended to change the position on which he sleeps until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can fracture and their attachment (or articular connection) can be affected, resembling the fractured spine (or vertebrae) in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and paralyzed, and they cannot move or strain those parts, and when you press on them with your fingers or a needle, they do not feel pain, then you know that they will not recover, and in such cases, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel constriction and pain in the joints and punctures, then know that the root of the bone is safe and the disease will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that the pain has already subsided, pay attention to the part affected, and when sitting down, they experience increased mobility and expulsion, but sometimes they rise up on their legs and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is serious, and thus do not try to treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no specific cause occurs for those symptoms, the cause is better and more easily resolved.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is to pierce at the seat of the abscess with a hot cautery or oil-soaked cloth; apply this to the affected area several times a day until the abscess is sedated by the cautery.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it around the affected area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, avoiding sleep on the painful side until the condition improves.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If a fracture occurs in the tibia or any other bone that has already separated, you must clean it by removing the dead tissue and hold up the bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing them if necessary; and treat the infected flesh with care until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of the bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, you must then insert your left hand's thumb into the gap between the broken bones and try to align them as best as possible using your other hand; then apply a splint and bandage over it, if needed, and tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones within it, then you must bind them and hold them in place, treating the wound with the appropriate care until it heals.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the bowel.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the bowels are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is no more than communication in the extremities of those parts, extending along their length and declining inward; and it causes pain to the patient at the site and a shock to the limb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should insert that according to what you have been taught by an equal art, as it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the length or extends inward towards the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on his stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have wrapped it up, place a plaster on top of it, and then place another sheet of wood or canvas over it, tightening with strength, without fear of fracture or removal of the stitch.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And wrap the concave space with something that fills it, as it takes on the shape of the body according to its firmness, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If there is a risk of gangrene, you must stop the spread of it and the restoration process until the gangrenous part is sedated, then apply what has been described before; then return to the restoration of it and tighten it well with a bandage.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it occurs in the bones or they are broken, then you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the broken assistant (or possibly, 'adjutori' refers to a specific body part, in which case it could mean 'On the healing of the broken [body part]').
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is to take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness according to this form...
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And it should be tied at both ends of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Then continue the treatment on a side; and, afterward, extend the broken arm over the wood until it reaches the thickest part of the wood at which point its curvature is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over that some grave cause, or the minister extend that to the parts left; and approach the physician who binds the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Another way is that the patient be turned over on their back and suspend the doctor's hand on the collarbone with ligatures; then command two ministers, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the pus below them; and each of them extend themselves to the respective parts.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten your hold on the fracture with ligatures and on that other one with another ligature; and each of the two ministers extends themselves to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligature be placed on the tendon and the other part supports the fracture towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if it appears that the fracture is close to the joint, then cover that ligament over that place and over that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply this with ease and care, and as it is wrapped according to how it should be covered and applied properly, then tighten it if there is no risk of ulceration carefully.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If there is a risk of ulceration, then do not tighten the wrap after the seventh day, and place on it woolen thread soaked in vinegar and olive oil to soothe the inflammation, and then you can tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap new cloth around the plaster; and adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open on its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unfold the cloth and tighten it on the arm support to keep the arm in place without any hindrance to the broken bone's healing, unless there is some reason to prevent it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you should place this stitch over the fracture, and make it thicker than the other stitches; and between each stitch, leave the distance of the said fragment, and the length of the stitches according to the break, adding three parts from the total measurement.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the stitches with the strainer as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your strain over the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the tighter the fracture, the less the strain.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, you should adjust the position of the stitches and the strain as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, then you are done.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, then relax the tension and remove the stitches within the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the dressing on all parts for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation; or restrict food from reaching the affected member due to excessive tension; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that no further cause will arise, then do not relax the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm, moist poultice full of wool on the broken member, and consider at all times during night or day that the bandage is not loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing becomes softened; thus correct it with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And hold the patient's food as we have ordered before, so that the food is thin at first and then gradually becomes thicker as it is consumed. And now you will notice that the patient's food becomes thicker.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the assistant and the leg support is to tighten them for 10 days, and you will notice that they should be relaxed and have baths administered and ointments applied that rectify this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is fresh and inflamed, you should not loosen the bandages or remove the stitches for one to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	**Restoration of Arm Fractures**
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, known as the little finger bone, and the other is larger and supports the little finger, extending upward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger or smaller bowstring is broken, they are usually cut at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bowstring breaks above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bowstring breaks below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worst case is when two bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller bowstring above, it is convenient for the doctor, as its restoration requires only minor extension and can be easily healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bowstring is what breaks, then it requires more violent extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are together cut, then be sure that you press the most powerful external pressure.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And be sure that you place your hand in such a way as to restore and extend it over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be above, rather than below, all other parts, and the acupressure point should be lower than all other points, and the pain should be centered on a well-prepared cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at the appropriate height or angle, so that the pain does not increase.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends their arm away from their body with their hand or instrument, and another minister extends theirs similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bone within such that it reduces according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstacles, you must perforate and reduce all the weight to its proper place using your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate condition that affects the bone and does not respond to your hopes of restoration, then you must end it and preserve that according to the manner we have spoken of above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is due to a wound, and you have already dealt with this particular case, then take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line it with a cloth made of rosy oil and white wax, with greater care between specific and subtle points, and tighten the cloth over that slight opening until the abscess subsides; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered earth mixed with oil of hou, and place stars; and let the star be the one that is paused over that fracture, both more to the side and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fractures together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater and more intense force, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or around the lower parts of it increases, release the pressure slightly more gently according to how the patient's pain subsides at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread by which they are tightened should be of the appropriate thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligaments after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires correction, and as the pain occurs in the member, then cover it with a water-filled poultice until the pressure subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And you should not restrict the member until it rests, then return the tightness appropriately.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears like those, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nutrition to the member is blocked due to excess tightness, so you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, then strengthen it appropriately.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not have any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hold the patient's hand with the virtue of its agile movement, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or often it is healed in 28 days, and all this depends on the arrangement of the complications and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and unless they are caused by sudden trauma, they do not heal quickly.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a hand experiences fracture or dislocation, you must ensure the patient remains calm and then gently place the hand over the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the physician should carefully straighten broken bones and align them so that they are congruent with one another.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover it with a plaster and stoppers, otherwise an infection may occur; and return the bandage from above according to the size of the place, and you have already wrapped that in cloth suitable.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the deep parts of the hand, and it makes a crackling sound like cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their crushed hand; then wrap a long cloth around it tightly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bandage of cloth over which the body is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what you cover.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with bandages and another bandage on the part left in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and then tighten the stricture, thus as the hand is revolved to its natural position between the said ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you suffer a fracture in one of the bones of the hand, if it is the little finger, it should be wrapped according to its shape and then tightly secured with the palm; if you wish, you can also place a small right-angled splint to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in one of the other fingers, for example in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the ring, or in the little finger (as mentioned before), it should be wrapped and secured to the corresponding finger; or all fingers can be wrapped together in succession, which is better; or a small splint can be placed over it, as we said regarding the little finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, the position of the abscess, carefully and oppositely - according to your judgment - as you treat any cause from those mentioned, as it is described in detail.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, extending to the wound according to how it turns into the opening and pus dominates.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament left on the fracture, and the patient is positioned on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is desired to straighten the thigh, then the ligament should be pulled towards the knee joint, allowing its extension, and another ligament left on the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if it seems that the fracture is complete, then do make the ligament proper to the joint, and extend it to the adjacent parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the surgeon should equalize the bones with their hands as they return to their natural position, and the bone is joined by a good connection; then it is necessary to cover that with plaster and compression, otherwise the member will become infected.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens in the infected member, then leave it for a few days until the infection subsides, and afterwards return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be done thus: it is necessary to cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, removing the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the limb.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and leg near the joint, bringing both ends together from either side, then turn over the cloth and thigh so that what is superfluous from the bandage falls away.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your hand on the thigh at the site of that fracture, and place one of those stones over the bone in the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the void between the thigh and leg with soft drapes to cause the constriction to coagulate.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin to apply strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four turns, and as you stretch away from the site of the fracture, your compression should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the strip to either side until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the cloth from the other side so that the ligament does not slip from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the stretch over that area so that it does not cause corruption, pustule, or inflammation similar to these; and if any cause of those arises, then take care to dislodge it, and correct what has happened immediately, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone due to pressure, then cover that area as best as you can; otherwise, apply a poultice and treat it, and cure what preceded the recollection until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so strong that it cannot be adjusted with bandages, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored on its own, then another method should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that the injured leg does not limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is strong in 40 days or a month or slightly more, and all of this depends on the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often ends in prolonged pain, frequently accompanied by inflammation and stiffness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it happens that the fracture is not just a crack or break in its parts, but rather a severe fracture, this is a great plague or woe, and everything has been said about its pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, as it is joined and combined according to what is possible through harmony and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a poultice and place it over that round wound, if needed; tighten around it with a strap as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions we have recommended for other fractures, thus with great care and in a similar manner to those that resist any occurrence that could hinder their healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the Restoration of the Broken Leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin, and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the restoration of the arm altogether, and the operation on one is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the broken bone is a subtle fracture, the leg is shattered in a different way.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the broken bone is very thick and deep, you will see a bulge there, and it is one of those causes that are not easily cured.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the bones according to the patient's condition.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the leg fracture is open and has not yet been stabilized, extension should be less and more gentle, and it will be helped by your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is a cause for operation on the arm, and when you bind the steels and complete all the surgical procedures, you will take wooden splints from which the causes that are left over in single pieces have been removed, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; attach those to the ones that require slight pressure, and be careful not to use your hands, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the outside inward to where it is most swollen.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each drape around the limb in two folds according to its length, placing one over the joint of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, ensuring they are well inside at the foot's base.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then secure the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, so that with this structure the limb is prevented from bending at the joint, and it remains in a stable position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the limb, and it is placed over the splints to prevent any further movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when it is truly necessary.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then, each day, consider the state of the limb and study it thoroughly, observing any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar issues; and when any such cause arises, immediately apply treatment to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer a fracture entirely; sometimes, it is the bones of the foot that suffer fractures; and the toes rarely experience fractures, but if they do, it is due to a lack of proper disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do fracture and these bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient should lie on their side with their foot prepared thus as it heals.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on top of what is elevated among these bones, and press those, and squeeze, and interlock them until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two plates placed beneath.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that on the foot at its proper level, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which you are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as the condition passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is just as well known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if it is that some of them are broken, then restore them, and engage those just as you have learned in the restoration of the said parts of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then apply this splint according to the length of the finger, and bend it slightly on each side; and place the foot on this table which is now properly positioned, and tighten that at its proper level.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then place your hand on each side of the quantity wrapped in lion's drapes, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an opening in the foot's belly for good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is advisable for you that you do not neglect to consider all the causes mentioned above regarding other fractures from accidents we have discussed; be prepared for any accident concerning this matter.
Capitol .xviii.	**Capitol .xviii.** (Capital XVIII) - This likely refers to a chapter or section title, indicating the eighteenth installment of a medical or scientific treatise.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	**On Fracture of the Hip Bone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bone.** - A brief title suggesting a section discussing fractures in specific bones: the hip bone (femur), shin bone (tibia), and male genital bone (not explicitly specified but likely referring to the penis or scrotum).
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone is fractured, make a cut in the soft tissue at the site of the fracture, then gently tilt the bone to align it with the other leg slightly, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the cavity with hot compresses, applying them to the affected area as needed; and the woman is made to bend, slowly raising her legs one by one, until all the fluid has drained from the cavity in front of the opening of the wound and the fractured bone heals.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place poultices on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them remove the compresses and let them urinate, then replace and return the compresses according to the same method used at the beginning, and return to their original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, as it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a small bladder of a sheep and place a tube of canvas over the wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, as the fracture heals.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with a compress and left for some days, as we have recommended, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and healing process, we apply what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be overlooked in these close fractures, and there is little risk, especially to those who have some knowledge and understanding of this my book; for that fracture reveals to you in the greatest dispositions for restoration and in the stricture of the bone, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's scrotum when it is broken, take a cold compress from above and place it on that; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped, and lay it for three days or so, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Capital .XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are wounded.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the hip or leg bone, or similar to those that require flaying and amputation at that time, as the conditions for amputation in your case or by testimony of others have indicated, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound exudes pus, then you must cover it, retaining the pus within, as you bandage it with clean cloth, if other causes do not require otherwise.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then, commence the restoration of the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless gangrene occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you experience an apoplexy (stroke) cautiously, then leave its restoration within the ninth day, until the apoplexy has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of every month, for you would cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone breaks off prominently at an exposed joint, cover it to reduce the fragment and secure it in place with your hands as easily and briefly as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is beyond your ability and the condition of the fracture requires a specific tool, then reduce it with your hands using this instrument; an instrument made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and a width proportional to the extent of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take from these three or four, according to the amount required for the cure in every type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be made in such a way, and with such thin material that it does not easily bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of sharp extremity where its margin is in their extremities; and it should extend from above with great tension, and from below within the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "voluntary hernia" in Greek, hence the term "paleta pauca.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	To ensure that the sharp extremity of the hernia is elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it draws in one go as the bone returns, and is wrapped with some tension.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore it tries to intertwine the ends of the fracture between them; and if the broken end is thin, and does not grip the instrument for a good grasp, then you must insert the end of that bone within the instrument's reach.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut open that part which we have mentioned to it by means of scissors, or saw off that part in any way possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then, cut off the one that is embedded in the bone with rough edges and small notches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned and the malady is reduced, it will cause intense pain, knowing that the bone has not yet returned to its natural place; and then you will have achieved great relief for the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once your restoration on the bone is complete and you immerse it in a black antiseptic solution, especially during summer, do not cover it with bandages or any other material that could cause putrefaction and corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply arrows at the appropriate times during the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can cut through it with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, leading to the patient's death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is light, soft, different from the swelling of other fractures, then...
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are concerned about further complications from those previously mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, do not press on it, but rather apply a hard wrap of coarse cloth instead of arrows and tighten it to those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the pain has been present for one or two days and a fever is generated in it, then remove the covering you had placed over that affected area, and administer some medicine, such as we usually use to treat pains, thus applying tetracycline and similar substances to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is appropriate for you to clean the wound and examine the plague each day and evening until it is consolidated and healed, ensuring that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague persists for many days and is not consolidated or drained from the arm, then you should know that these are strategies of the small pox in order to prevent the plague from spreading everywhere it tries.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those strategies, the ones that are distinct and separable should be removed, while the ones that are not separable and cause the member to become inflamed and painful, you should incise them by making cuts as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is infected with pus or gangrene, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each one of these as you deem appropriate for the cure, which is described in detail in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I must do and you present your case: when the flesh is torn, it protrudes over the member, resembling the bones of the thigh and its support, and does not show any attraction to movement, nor should you attempt to extract it, as this may cause death; leave it be until it becomes gangrenous, which can take several days or even weeks; and treat the wound if you see it, but leave it alone if not.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	**On the cure for nodules that occur at the site of a fracture.**
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motas visible incidents occur during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and this is due to the shape of the member; thus it severely hinders the member's natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the displacement is recent and apply those medicines that have stopped it so far, such as aloes, herbs, and other similar ones; take some or all of these, and place those with a stiptic effect, or albumen from animal blood, or agerum, over the displacement in a poultice, and constrict them around it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And observe the tightness; do not remove it for several days; then loosen it and apply another treatment, as long as the displacement persists; or place a sheet of lead over it, since lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the displacement has already turned into a stone and the tightness is due to necessity, then cut it off with a sharp instrument, incise the superfluous and protruding part, or remove it with a surgical hook, as long as it remains undischarged; and treat that until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures, once restored, it is then wrapped in a soft and clean cloth according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, it is then wrapped in a soft and clean cloth, but its use should be for legitimate reasons: one of which is to ensure the solution of the ligament and the proper union without any hindrance; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents the flow of nutrition to the affected member; or because of excessive sweating; or because of superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or because of a constriction of blood in the patient's body, caused by weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this involves restricting the patient's food and making their body gentle, so that the blood is not concentrated in it; baths should be administered, and gauze and spices applied.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place your hand over the member, so that the grip draws to it much nutritious fluid, or continue washing with lukewarm water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the healing of fractured bones when they are restored incorrectly and the operation of covering them is prohibited.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of it from tortuosity and protrusion on the fractured bone should be done, and this is for the form of the member; however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, as long as you receive the permission of one who considers that member newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is highly disdained, losing much to great fear the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If recent claudication and nodulation are present, then it should be treated with tepid water in which gentile herbs such as althaeas and roots of licorice, and similar ones, have been soaked; and make a moist poultice with it, or use a thick paste of althaea root mixed with wool grease or oil of myrtle, and apply it; or use fresh fat figs pressed into the shape of columbar women, resembling those used in certain medicines known as softening consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction applied to the most moist parts, and the affected member should be moved in every direction at regular intervals.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already progressed and is hard and twisted, becoming a stone, and its removal by surgery is necessary, then it should be treated by draining the pus that has accumulated and dissolving the continuation of the bone; it should be cut with delicate scissors, easing the tension in that joint.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the dislocation of one of the joints in its place, which prevents movement and distorts the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when any dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so, if it is not correctly reduced while the joint is stiff, it causes spasms and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this occurs, you must then perform a flabotomy on the patient and place something between the dislocated joint to relieve the strain; then immerse the limb in warm water and oil and reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with the remedy of which the recollection will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the joints of the dislocation as previously mentioned in the fracture; from the upper part of the body entering into the lower part, it is necessary to pay attention.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both mandibles are dislocated and there is no bleeding, the displacement of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly removed from their places with little movement, or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so that saliva from the wound cannot exit, and he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is wrapped around its own shape.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper place on its own without any specific cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to gently reduce the dislocated part without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have hold of the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw within the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs, if the dislocation is on both sides, and all other fingers are outside, which they equal; and commands the patient to stop moving his jaws and release them from any strain; and the doctor equally holds the jaw and gently pushes it back until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved, without delaying the reduction of either one completely, as we have said above.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when we return and find them all engulfed, and the opening of the malady is closed and not relieved, then place a cerot on those drape powders, made of wax and oiled, and make it easy with soft bindings.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient should lie on their back with their head between two pillows, so that they do not cough to either the right or left side; and do not force them to eat more than they wish. When the pains are relieved and the jaws unclenched, then they can eat what they desire.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or coughing, as long as the jaw is unclenched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated in any moment and not returned to their proper places, then fever and constant vomiting occur, and the patient's belly is greatly strained, and they vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and many times the man who suffers from this in X days dies.
Capitol .xxv.	**Chapter 25**
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	**On the Reduction of a Dislocated Furcula and Extremity of Muscle.**
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the latissimus dorsi by its attachment to the leg; however, sometimes it is dislocated at the distal part and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then tighten the area with your palm using a firm pressure, as it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply pressure to that dressing and compress it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the end of the limb that is affected is not displaced but continues to be sore, then it should be reduced and bandaged as we have described and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to that dressing, and compress it, and command the patient to remain still and at rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXIII.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle displacement.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, one of which is displaced at the attachment to the bone at the joint.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is displaced at the attachment of the muscle, and this is done carefully; and it is not dislocated at the rear attachments through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front attachments by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly displaced and comes out at the attachment on the inside of the thigh, especially in those places where there is little flesh, it is slightly displaced; but more frequently in those where there is much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from accidents due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected part is torn from its attachment, it becomes swollen, and it is treated in this way that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then understand that your breath enters here while you are pressed upon by it, and then you will proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips from its place; so you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, as you find diversity among them; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and leave the tendon slipped after touching the head of the muscle thus as if by a wound, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position nor move it without pain.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you find clear signs of impact, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, light reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to its place; then he places his fingers under the tendon, and lifts the joint with strength to its position, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then he lets go so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It is not possible to provide a line-by-line translation without the full context and proper understanding of the specific dialect used in the text. However, based on the given excerpt, here is a best-guessed translation:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then position the patient so that they are lying on their back, and place them with their testicles hanging down, waiting for them to be lubricated between relaxation and contraction; then the doctor places his foot over the expectant area, raises the head of the muscle towards the vertical, pulls the hand of the patient away from the parts below, and another assistant holds the patient's testicles so that they are not pulled from their position, for as soon as it relaxes, it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: make present a man who is longer than the patient, and place him on that side, then insert his muscle between the testicles of the patient and raise the testicles up to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air; another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lighter, then make sure that nothing else causes it to be suspended, for then it becomes serious, as the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with its head shaped like a mortar's pile, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is positioned under the patient; the pain stands according to the length of the stick, and the hand of the one who applies it extends to the parts on either side; and the body part extends from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the aforementioned causes, use this cure: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance between two arms (two cubits), and its thickness from the elbow down should be four digits, and shape it in this manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place lion's fur around the head of the stick to prevent it from damaging the pain.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then it is paused, the patient's thigh, and the hand or arm is extended over the leg within the spaces left, and the leg is wrapped over the helper, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	It is then paused, the arm over a scale according to its length, and the hand is extended within the spaces left, and the other side is suspended from the other part, so that the joint is brought together within a little while.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is completed according to any method that is possible for you, and it is observed that you pause the pressure of the thread with a hope of wool in an equal amount; then prepare a plaster with powder from mills mixed with egg album over all the muscles, so they are revolved upon it, and the thread is tightened around the pressure at a decent place; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of the patient is attached to its collarbone, and it is left, and the hand of the patient is not moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient's diet is restricted, as long as the member is supported, for it is lighter on the healing of the injury.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then gradually increase the diet and exercise; if it is stopped and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that occurs to it or another cause, then ensure that appropriate cautery is administered with three tools, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are reduced on him a few times, but it is not secured and he cannot raise that arm due to its nerves, which are at the top of the muscle, already damaged or stretched or softened, then know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is affected, you must reduce the foot and ankle or the joints behind, the reduction is done with pressure and extension of the limbs, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both these structures should be managed, and care taken until they are healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the healing becomes more difficult in the member and the movements are delayed, then the disease uses frequent baths to alleviate this gravity and return it to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of hip dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated entirely, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any swelling or touch, according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover them with pillows, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it approaches the safe limit, for if it reaches the safe limit, reduction becomes difficult, and it is not easily healed; especially when it occurs in the back parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing great pain, and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, involves extending the patient's hand with two assistants, expanding their legs, and the doctor placing his hands on the patient's thighs and pushing the joint back into place using the fingers of one hand or the edge of the palm of the other, until it returns to its normal position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return the hand by bending it with the doctor striking the thigh with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And indeed, two assistants stretch their arms, and each hold this extension for a proper measure to avoid haste.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then slowly rotate the arms through all parts, as it is wrapped with a long, folded cloth over their hand, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it to prevent those causes that lead to stiffness in the joint, and then gently pushes and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is pressed onto the paste in which it is stuck and sealed with white of egg, and extract it gently from constriction, then suspend the arm from the collarbone and leave it for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it becomes loose, and thus if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not tight, repeat the application of the plaster and lubricant, leaving it for some days until it is detached, then remove it carefully.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it is a case of severe inflammation and the joint is in a state of movement, then apply moisture in the form of baths and gentle friction, and keep the affected area elevated until the swelling subsides; or, if it involves lubricating a grassy joint, then place a compress, leaving it for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then secure that compress and immerse the affected part in a bath; when it is clean, repeat the friction of the joint with gentle, warm friction, applying it three times daily until movement ceases.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bath, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scalded wound edge and press down on it; do this several times, as that wound is moist and it will help to reduce it in size.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the hand's joint is dislocated, and its reduction upon displacement is delicate; conversely, other joints may be more robust, yet it is crucial to act swiftly during reduction in the moment of dislocation, lest the location become stiff or develop a bruise due to cauterization.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their arm, while the doctor places his or her hand over the joint, pressing it back into its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider if the palm of the hand has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the illness rests the back of the hand on a table in front of the extension and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred before, the position of the hand from within over the table, so that the doctor's hand may grasp upon that proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if this returns soon, it is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage gently, allowing the hernia to recede, and do not be concerned, as long as it does not cause suffering or hinder the reduction of the hernia over time.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, consider the joint's range of motion according to its deformity; do not attribute any cause to the illness other than the hand being softened and unable to exert any force; know that the nerves are either torn or stretched, and it is only by cauterization near their attachment that you can reduce it and firmly establish a cure.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the disease returns, place your hand on the poultice we have prepared, and leave it for several days; then loosen it and place it again, and exercise your hand upon it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then apply gentle pressure with water and friction a few times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter XXIX**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the Treatment of Dislocating Joints**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the joints completely dislocate.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint of those in the back of the hand or on the stomach is dislocated, tighten the joint and push the dislocation back with your fingers, until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to that narrative, continue to stretch it and do not stop loosening it during the day and practicing movements, and stretch it at night; do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's abdomen, stretch it to that opening and make your first operation on it until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the spinal or cervical vertebrae become dislocated, causing severe pain, it is difficult to restore them to their proper position, as the damage can be fatal to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the management of the patient's condition is beyond their control, and they cannot hold onto it; sometimes the muscles of their legs or both legs or both arms or one of these become softened, or a vertebra becomes dislocated, because often times it is dislocated and removed from its four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, when it is dislocated at the rear parts, it is called 'gelbousness'.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for it is that you must consider whether the swelling occurs from childhood, because at that time there is neither cure nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	If you see it caused by accident or impact or something similar to these, the ancients have already described lengthy ways of treatment, most of which are profitable; but you should have already been familiar with that about which there is little excuse due to its excessive size, through my proximity to understanding, to which I have here exposed and shaped from various instruments of which I will now show and spread this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that the swelling that occurs in the foot due to sudden movement is neither cure nor healing for that; and similarly for that which is caused at two joints.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And for those, there is cure only for that which occurs in the back itself, as you have already understood.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their back with both legs drawn up towards the wall, and then stretch them out firmly so that the patient's feet are not bent.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the patient's leg around their head, and another stick should have the patient's feet held in the other end of the leg.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The practitioner should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a pit; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then cover the patient's head and leave the tight bands unloosed; extend the end of the band to the stick which is against their head, and tie that to them; and tighten the other band over their hips, towards their knees, and adjust all the bands, tying those to the other stick which is against their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the surgeon should stretch the bandage around the leg, and do not remove the splints or bindings from their positions in which they are fixed, but do not make them too tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on one table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is closest to the disease's location.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and presses until the spine is constrained and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open and turn it with your hand; and since you must stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of the punch with two fists, the length of which should be a arm, and place his head at the very back of the fist with two punches; and the distance between each punch should be a palm, and already a cut has been made in each punch through which blood flows, and every part is firmly held down on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another punch where the flow turns, and turn it in the two channels of the two punches.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a channel in which the punch is formed, the length of which is a palm where it turns; and the other two punches are similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot at the pull where his head is placed, and the ligaments you have tightened on his thighs in the turn that is directed towards his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor aligns the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place, and the position is corrected, then cover it with a dry, clean cloth, and stop. Then place a piece of tablecloth over it, whose width is about three times the length of the affected area, and its length covers the entire region of redness, and above the point of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then, using the aforementioned method, apply a gentle treatment with subtle nutrition to ensure it heals.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered through table treatment for a long time, which we have recommended; and this has already been applied to that place with lead leaf.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there occurs a threat at the rear of the spinal bones of the back, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you must be aware of, for it will cause great harm to him if this medicine is not administered promptly, as it can lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the hip joint and the muscular joint should never be dislocated except in cases where it occurs with other joints of smaller movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward or outward, or in front or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated within the joints, less often in the joints facing forward or the rear joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation within the joints is as follows: when you adjust the leg of the patient towards health, it becomes longer and the opposite side protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot in the normal way, which is where the limb's aponeurosis becomes tight, so that the head of the bone has already reached this point.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs is in the external joints, as the accidents of the limb are opposed to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs at the front joints is that the patient extends their leg completely, but they cannot bend it due to the pain located on the opposite side, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so; the urine may be retained, and the limb's tendon becomes tight, requiring them to bear weight on the foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of a dislocation in the rear parts is that it does not extend the pain, nor can it bend the part opposite to the bent knee, and the leg of the patient is shorter on one side than the other, and the joint is softened, and the end of the limb is usually at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The primary reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider, and if the dislocation is old and long-standing, having been reduced once before with your own hands according to its position, it is not suitable for further treatment; therefore, no further intervention is necessary.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types, you should do this: turn the joint and extend it both inside and outside the affected areas, and also to the right and left, so that it returns strongly and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, be prepared to make a strong minister and extend the patient's bed from below, or add more, or apply what is tied over their abdomen; and another minister extends his hand from that side so as to place his hands behind the patient's thighs; and tighten the ligature around the root of the thigh, and have another minister hold the end of the ligature.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is an extension of him or the removal from within the angle at the departure of the fork, or from behind at the departure of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all of them at once, as long as the patient's condition is elevated to his body from the ground and the hangnails are hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is specifically unique to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary for every kind of case to say something about its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be pulled tight across the root of the fold in that area where the hernia protrudes between the top of the fold and the location that leaves the pain; and then extend the ligament above from the part of the angle to the most upper part of the furca.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant should strongly hold the patient's arms, press the thick part of the affected fold, and extend it outward forcefully to ensure it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is of the most light treatment to which this member is reduced, as compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused on your body and you do not disobey the treatment of this type of cure for all, then you should tie both feet of the patient together with a strong ligature, lighter, on both the shins and both the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of them is according to the quantity of four parts, and the affected limb extended more than the other by a quantity of two parts.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the head of the leg, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is the quantity of two arms' length.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to reduce the head of the hernia, and hang it from another young man, and let the other young man press on the hernia with force, as the joint returns to its place at great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction of dislocations when they occur outward, it is necessary to keep the patient in a state of tension according to what has been previously recommended regarding immobility; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh and leg.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then use two wooden splints, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and place a splint adjusted to the middle of the leg, wrapped with damp cloths, so that the malady is not harmed by the splint between the patient's thighs, so you can prevent the extension to the parts beyond.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand performs the reduction according to art (or skill).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you reverse the procedure, it will result in great pain; but if not, apply it diligently as we have said regarding immobility through that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Ensure that the patient lies on their back comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should extend the leg slightly, and according to this method, as I have described for the foot; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the affected joint, and then with his other hand he pulls it, extending it fully from the opposite side.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not stretch the patient out fully, but raise him above the ground; when you have placed him comfortably on a hard surface, thus as we said about his posture on two legs; and his face and limbs are extended, according to what we have said, without any harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And you should apply compression with a splint over the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, once the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, since you extend two thighs from the patient's condition, and when you see those engorged veins and the patient extrudes their thigh and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to its place has returned — and now you adjust two things and apply a poultice and remove the bandage so that the opening is not made larger in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligament and poultice, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those veins on the surface, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply poultice to that, and remove that according to your initial stretch, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then gradually withdraw it, causing the patient to walk slowly on their own within a few days, until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: when it moves apart, or inside, or to the side more than is normal, or when it does not move at all forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated shoulder is that you tell the patient to apply their leg against the thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient cease their movement directly, so that they extend their leg if possible; join their hands to the shoulder, and place the foot of the dislocated arm between them; then take hold of the shoulder with your palms, and press those between your fingers over the shoulder of the patient until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that its leg adheres to the thigh in a non-labouring state.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a poultice to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind them with bandages for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, unless they feel well and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not justified, then administer a strong extension to the limbs whose treatment has been described in the preceding narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii is in Roman numerals, translating to 33)
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot, in some cases, is remedied with slight removal, and in some cases, it is dislocated completely; the dislocation is made either within the joint or outside of it.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the foot is that the toe swells up towards the joint where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for the dislocation of the foot is with gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and then wrapped until it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the cure for a completely dislocated foot, you must cease the patient's movement directly, and have someone of great strength and courage hold the joint firmly in its proper place behind the patient's back at the middle of the dislocated part.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you should place your right hand on the top of the foot from the dominant side, and your left hand below the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left, for two times, extend it; push the foot's heel towards the bed's edge as you work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do it twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And on the third time, push the foot's heel towards the bed's edge while you are at the patient's side.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one or two times following this manner, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that place.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce the hernia in this manner we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground and stretch a hard board across their thighs, and wrap them tightly with cloth so that the hernia does not escape.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the doctor should position himself, and another minister extends the foot with its toes or the bandage that lies on the top of the foot; and another minister stretches this same minister against the extension of his leg, and the padding between the patient's thighs holds it in place so that the treatment is not pulled away from where it needs to be after its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor re-aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on either side to prevent the dislocation from returning.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And once the dislocation is correctly realigned and the reduction of the joint is declared successful, then bandage it and reinforce that ligament strongly, and tie the foot to the leg with bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so as not to strain or injure that ligament strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then apply heat for two days or three; if the inflammation subsides, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or the fourth, remove the pack, and forbid the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to move the patient before the pack is removed, there is a risk that the dislocation will not heal properly, and this may result in permanent damage.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if a feverish apothema occurs, apply what we have mentioned before, in addition to other remedies and baths, as long as it is necessary.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the cure of dislocations of the feet's joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Know that one who is dislocated should be immersed in water of a certain extent for their treatment; and what is not difficult, it should be lifted sooner.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated at a height equal to that of their body or on a table, and keep it in that position as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, place your own foot on what you suspect to be the affected joints, press gently until you feel the dislocation return, and ensure that it is completely reduced and does not reappear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a board under the patient's foot that takes weight, with two ends, and hold it tightly with a strap in a comfortable but firm position for three days; after that, remove the board and allow them to walk slowly for several days until healing is complete.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other event.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs and you address the cure for it and the restoration of its health, sudden complications may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, it is not appropriate to presume over the cure of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, of long experience, mercy and compassion, late, not hasty or presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning of medicines that yield gentle purges solely, and leave the disease to divine judgment, except for him through whom you hope for salvation from perdition, alleviation of ill-health, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, as soon as possible, strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying violent purges.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the member returns to its normal state, then administer treatment that prevents further inflammation and heals the wound with appropriate dry compresses.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a dislocation occurs as a fracture and the bones are separated, then you should perforate their joint, and do as we have said about simple injuries of this kind that precede in the places of those mentioned.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be mindful and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to your Creator, and may perpetuate your glory, and bring greater health to your true body in its proper time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, these words of Albucasim are perfectly completed from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
