Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Avicenna.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my children, as you have completed this book, the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its purpose it has come to an end, and due to its expositions, explanations, and declarations, I believe you now possess great knowledge from this treatise, which is a part of the most important operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, considered the most important operation in our region and time, has been largely forgotten due to the lack of knowledge about it, and the study of it has ceased; its principles are closed, its force weakened, and its art neglected, as is evident from the few descriptions found in the books of the Ancients.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has seemed to me that I should revive the order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments may be added for clarification, and preparation, which is necessary for its execution.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why our skillful doctor lacks mastery in this our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy, and he does not have sufficient training in the science of anatomy which reveals how the joints work within each member and their forms; and the connection and separation of them; and knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of these, and their extraction; and also of pulsating veins and static ones, and the places from which they emanate.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is worthy, yet in practice it is small, especially in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who are ignorant of what we have said about anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into errors from which men can die, as you have seen many such people, some formed in this science and others having gained knowledge of it through experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You see a foolish doctor who has cut open a pus-filled abscess in the breast of a woman, and he has cut some arteries in her breast so that much blood flows out until the woman dies from it.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who attempts to remove a stone from a man who had passed it, and the stone is large, and he comes to him and extracts that stone with a part of his bladder, so that man dies on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for help to remove it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knows that he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who is paid handsomely by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he takes a black cat that was badly broken; due to his ignorance, the doctor extracts the fracture over the wound, with pincers and forceps, but does not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then dislodge it according to their wishes, and apply rest, and elevate for some days, and order that the bandage be removed; and thus also for the foot, if it has healed, so that the matter does not recur and cause harm.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And they have often called upon him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and as a result, there is peace and thus an end to their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, then it cannot be restrained, and the corruption does not cease to spread throughout the member until the danger of the illness increases.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who perforates a cancerous fistula, and it becomes an ulcer that takes several days to heal, until the malignancy of the disease increases under his care.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes the pain to be purely from melancholic humor, and it does not cover that it will harm them completely, but rather that it should be in the member where they suffer most.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and the other is in a work which is perilous to the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are discussed that contain error and fear; for it is necessary for you to keep this and reject that, so that people do not take the wrong path and speak against you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients as an ease and a stability.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means by the grace of God to achieve salvation and glorious success, leave behind terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and set aside your fears so that your faith and your name are not abandoned: for more remains to your glory, both now in this world and forever after in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	He already dissected in some of his own members:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not cure bad ailments improperly, lest bad doctors become renowned.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first, from the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered deals with the feet, in the forms of instruments and the craftsmanship of cauterization tools, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter discusses incision and perforation, and the use of cupping glasses, poultices, and extracts from arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a well-ordered chapter on internal foot issues and the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and the recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the materials for that cautery and the documents related to it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery materials and the documents related to them is long, prolix, and subtle in its knowledge, and secrets are hidden within it; and much has been written about it by scholars, but there are disagreements among them, so I will content myself with a brief discussion of their points.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every condition universally, whether it be of material or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions that have their own matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition that is dry and hard, the matter is out of balance; some say that cautery is beneficial for such cases, while others say the contrary, claiming that cautery is not appropriate for ailments caused by dryness and hardness, as the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be counterproductive to treat a condition that is dry and hard with heat and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the contrary claim that cautery is beneficial for all dry and hard conditions seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the condition of fire, you find the body of man to be rough.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And he says through the discourse of those who claim this, that he has already experimented with it several times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable to attempt this without proper training and knowledge, as one who has already been initiated and practiced in the art of cautery on various parts of the body, knows well the diversity of human anatomy, the disposition of ailments within their members, the causes of these, and the circumstances surrounding them, and the passage of time regarding these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complex cases, there is no need to fear, especially in gouty and humid ailments, for all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree on the treatment with cautery in these cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lies in cautery as a medicinal remedy, for fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without causing pain to other members nearby, except perhaps with a slight sensation.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members from which it draws its strength, and it strongly affects a member suffering from a difficult-to-heal ailment, aiding its recovery.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, for it does nothing but superfluous things. It has long been known to us from experience and from the longevity of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and therefore you are excused from the length of speech. If it were not that it is read at my own leisure in this brief moment, I would secretly keep the fire from you, as well as the quality of the operation in the body and its expulsion by which you expel illnesses, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know this, my children, that the timing of when to perform cautery and place pads is best during springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by time's accident is overshadowed by the healing of what is thrown off by cautery, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary aches, severe and acute, which do not suffer from delay, since it is feared of those who come with evil, that it is better to inflict minimal damage entering at the right time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus, do not sit on your feet, my sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who value such things; for that illness which is healed by cautery does not always return, but leaves its consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they believe, for cautery is merely a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its validity and virtue in operation and the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, depending on the composition of the illness and the location of their affliction, and the strength of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has come to them through their food and similar causes; but the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a few excesses and humors, just as dental cautery for pain and similar conditions, so it may be that that pain does not return, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is often said in popular speech that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech, not to those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profit through medicine or any other cause near cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and I understand that saying a cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers methods of healing in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not take effect, and then at the end of the cause, one applies a cautery and profits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it follows that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the vulgar and too many lay physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this but for the equality of the gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not entirely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only causes pain in some bodies; cautery with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you make a cautery with fire, be careful, because gold melts according to the quantity you want, due to the intensity of the heat, and if you place it over the fire, some sheets may fall into the fire so that the artisan suffers from occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cautery with iron requires that we hold it lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already organized this chapter on cautery according to other chapters, and you have ordered those from the beginning related to the feet, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	About cautery for head pain caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers dryness and coldness upon the affected part, which is the primary cause of sudden and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called chills, from the head to the extremities of the arms and legs, as well as many sleep-related issues, toothache and throat pain, and generally any illness that arises from cold, also causing paralysis, stiffness, and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method for this cautery is as follows: first, command the evacuation of the illness using laxative medicines, three or four nights in a row, according to the nature of the illness, the patient's age, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head, and make a cut between their thighs on a clean bench, and place their hands on the afflicted foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your palm's pressure on the bridge of their nose between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the said condition of the middle part is overcome, mark that place with a try, and then apply the olive-shaped cautery whose form is this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the healthy area marked with a try, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is gradually constrained, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then gently lift your hand and inspect the area, and if you see that any bone is exposed, as well as any amount of gum or stone (calculus), lift your hand, and if not, return your hand to that instrument, or another one from it, while keeping it cold until you are able to see the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the area soaked in border and leave it on the inside until the wall of fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the treatment to the area with the four-part remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the better the brace, as it is more beneficial and restorative.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that some of them cauterize the cord within the bone and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then they remove what is adjusted to the bone, and then it is cleaned.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say others that with the cautery to reach the deepest, it strengthens the bone from within, so that the bone does not break, and this is the form of creating small incisions:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that from that place, vapours from the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it heals and hardens.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but only to certain individuals out of fear; and in those cases, when it is necessary for healing, it is best done as soon as possible, as we have seen with the other members, especially when the head of the malady is of a feverish nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The specific type of cautery, when applied correctly, is the safest and best method for healing; and from that practice and with that work comes health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head, and this persists for an extended period of time, and various remedies such as herbs, combs, caps, plasters, guazes, caldrons, goats, sheep, and similar treatments are used, especially if a cautery has already been performed that does not address the root cause of the malady, then one must consider whether the nature of the head ailment is robust; if there is no significant or severe pain, then another cautery should be applied.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on the side of the head where the hairline is parted using an internal cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the hairline and expose the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place called "vas" - it is the location where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bone, for the illness finds great pain through this, different from the pain of all other cauterizations on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should perform this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization which treats the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cauterization than the one performed on the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capitol terms. (Note: This appears to be a heading or a title, not a sentence to translate.)
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe pain arises at the base of the head or a burning pain extends to the ear, it is treated with medicines that cleanse the head, and other cures, as I have mentioned regarding the deviances of illnesses; and if these do not prove effective, cauterization on it is performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May there be cauteries or burning medicines, you should take a hot cloth, cut it open, and extract the extreme ends of it from both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the painful area on the temple with a lance, carefully so as not to cause further harm, until the pain is alleviated.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then you should stretch it strongly after the swelling has subsided, and leave it for three hours; and afterward, extract the foreign body, and apply a poultice for two or three days, and keep the affected area submerged in cold water until the pain ceases.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you should apply a cure made from a potion, as long as it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, perform these using some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Apply the cautery according to this manner: take a hot iron whose shape is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small eminence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply pressure over the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the skin from being burned—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood stuck due to the specific condition of the vein is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vein, raise your hand so that the artery below is not affected, preventing any flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak it in salt water and place it over the area for three days; also apply a lot of heat, and take care to use ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, burn the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to make an incision into the artery in this fresh wound especially.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of old wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating an old wound as we have discussed in the previous treatment and the divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not improve or worsens due to the illness that does not allow access to what we have said about the initial cauterization with medicine or fire, then you must ignite the cuticular cautery until it is whitened, indicating over the area of pain along the length of which is the most intense, or where; and rest your hand for a moment and press deeply as you make an incision into the arteria.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which is damaged and affects chewing, that the fracture is not healed and the nerves which are affected by it, and that a spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from an artery that is severed, as in the case of its abrupt separation, there is fear, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack study and patience; and thus, surgery on them should be delayed.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you should return to the recollection of the regulation of the flow of blood from an artery according to its nature in its proper place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you find that this illness does not respond to the cautery and see that the patient's condition is tolerable, perform the cautery in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have said in the chapter on the tightness of archery with a cautery that has two blades; this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	**Chapter: On the Treatment of Joint Pain (Gout)**
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of earache.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with purgative remedies and other cures as mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery, which is known as a 'point', and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the point close to the heat source, and turn it around the entire ear or in any direction if the pain is in any part of it.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Keep the heat application on the ear gradually, until the area is healed and free from pain.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the heat application with these points is done on the entire ear, and some are left, then treat the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	**Capital VI.**
De cauterizacio de turtura.	**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species that arise from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Cauterization should be avoided for this species that is meant to dry up or spasm the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of tortuous vein with squeezing and purging, but do not confirm your treatment, then know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you cut the ear's edge, second, you make a small incision near their temple, and third, you target the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery to the opposite side of the diseased part, for relaxation is only found in the part that appears sound.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize with a hot iron on the right side of the ear's lobe, slightly above the ear canal, and on the temple, whose length corresponds to the length of the finger, and place your hand over it until the quantity of the substance of the cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specifically from a cutting tool, the shape of which is placed face-up.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you can see with your eyes, and take care to avoid excessive roughness on it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Capital VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what we have said does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize as follows: first on all corners of their head; second, at the middle point of the head, as we have said; and third, on the joint (or 'coguot').
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more delayed; and then it is carefully treated with what you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Capital VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of an oblivion made by inflammation.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient herbs and small pills at the beginning, which the servants will prepare and administer.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then thoroughly wash the patient's head, and place on their wound the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, for that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if it is for the good of the patient, do so; otherwise, make three cauterizations to them on the back part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head towards the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, he should pay attention to the thickness of the skin, and then take care to apply the cautery correctly.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the patient endures the pain, and the disease is in the middle part of the body, then make the cautery on the middle part; but if greater suffering occurs, cauterize it over both humps.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care of that which is healed; and make the cautery olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Remember that you must proceed in the softening of the head according to what we have said; then, shave the patient's head, and cauterize it with an olive-shaped cautery on the middle part of the head, and cauterize all the humps of the head, and cauterize over the last joint of the body, and make three cauterizations over the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much stiffness and the pain is tolerable but intense, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back, and later apply a cautery inside until the severe pain is relieved, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then carefully tend to it until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic should not be cauterized, but rather the type of epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so it is important to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning, applying heat and other cures as we have discussed in the previous division when the illness is severe and tolerant of medicinal treatment.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer liquids and easy-to-digest foods for several days, to the benefit of their diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over any corners of the head that have been cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply cauteries as mentioned above, with a view to having a paralytic and relaxing effect on the body over the cervical and dorsal spines.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted corrupt humors and excessive phlegm, cauterize it with cautery as we have said in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, and apply a suitable twist to the torments around the circle, and rest it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And when the patient feels the pain subsiding, and is free from all parts of the body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be done before shearing sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that above the fire with gentle heat for a measured time, which gives her relief as it increases in intensity.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take the cloth and place it in the middle part of his head in a circle, and cool it until it is cold.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient every day for a week, or follow another regimen of his good food until he is cured; or if you prefer, cauterize those making small dots according to what is most appropriate for him, but always hold your hand over it in an orderly manner: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that warm compress on the edges or in the colors of sheep's wool.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the draining of water from the swelling.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you recognize the onset of water in the swelling through the signs that I have mentioned in the previous section, then commence and cause the patient to drink something that purifies their head, and monitor them from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And do that soaking in a bath with herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to scrape their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize with two irons over two temples if it is the onset of water in two swellings, or on one side if it is the onset of water in one swelling.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterization should be done at that length, in the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And seek knowledge that is extracted from arteries, and amputation of those, and cauterization to prevent blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing tools.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	**On the cauterization of old tears.**
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are chronic and through veins and arteries in the manifest location of the head outside, and it is verified that this causes superflux of weak muscles, cauterize that with a pointed cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, cauterize in the middle location of the head, and two cauterizations below the temples, and two cauterizations below the bones of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional indigestion, cauterize that across the entire surface of the eye's coat on the extremity of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating the condition we described in the previous section and if your treatment does not benefit the patient, prepare and make them drink a mixture of herbs for three nights; then shave their head and cauterize with a middle-sized cautery or an olive-sized cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a cautery to that, using two cauteries on each of the eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the shape of the cautery claw is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply a cautery to both eyelids with a small cautery across the entire area, and they should be elongated from the temporals.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI.**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and place the cautery on the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inside out and placed on the eye, cauterization is done in two manners: either by making a cut or by using a medicated burning cautery.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is with fire, command the patient to open their eyes wide, so that the hairs are pulled out along with those that remain, as long and thick as possible; and if you have to put them back, tighten the eyes with a bandage so that the hairs do not grow again.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore when they are born and equally engorged, you shall place the patient's head in a low position, then gently press over the eyelid of their eye, signaling according to the shape of a dead leaf, and this is the beginning of the signal near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a cold compress or a thick paste of owl's egg or bird droppings to the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the cautery whose shape is as follows.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize according to the shape that is indicated, gradually, in multiple attempts, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as it is with myrtle leaves, appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of healing of the eye work is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hairs raised above the point of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, and then apply a bandage to the affected area until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then do the cautery again on that entire area just as you did originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed, so that the hairs do not reappear.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicinal fire is what you order for the patient to remove the hairs until they are prolonged and healed, and then make a bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known soap and a live cause, or whatever it is, and mix those good causes together, making a feast of it so that it is not chilled; and spread this from it on the paper which is made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both wounds; and leave the fragrant edge wrapped in white honey, and the patient's head in the tiara.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And now let me tell you about the medicine, and apply it gently, not forcing it, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire within them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so as you continue with this that the disease bites, then cease the medicine and apply it again to the right place; thus, when the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider whether the eyelid is lifted as it should be washed daily with either fire or an incision, for that is good. And if it does not return to the application of the medicine to the place where the medicine was not absorbed and does not disfigure your work, but rather tightens the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and take care of it with a definitive ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if the eyelid after a few days becomes softened due to any cause from the hairs in the socket, then repeat your medicine on that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the method of extracting the myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and therefore your compression should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of correction should not be hidden from him who is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When treating a fistula using the method described in the previous sections and your treatment does not yield results, you should proceed as follows: have the patient lie down with their head raised on pillows, and hold their head steady with one hand between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some hot compress or a paste of egg whites and poultry feathers to the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And make the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be convex, shaped like a cane or a feather pen, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to get out this way, do so with caution.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, he who is calm is better suited to the surgical work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place on it a cautery that has been well-ignited, and with your hand, slightly deviate the cautery from the nose's opening, so that your hand or the patient's pain is not aggravated, and afterward, apply the cautery to the grays of the nose and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if, at the beginning of applying the cautery, it enters into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; leave it in place for three days, and then apply pressure to that area with a border, and surround it with a drying agent until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it is not healed, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and it heals as it should in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way to make a fistula cautery that some masters have said: enter the place of the fistula and close it, then apply pressure on the smooth crack from which it is formed; and pour into that as much molten lead as necessary; with your hand held in good retention, do not let the patient's condition worsen so that the melted lead does not reach the wound; and cover where you are applying pressure over the wound with a cloth dipped in oil or water, so that the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a drain from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose as it will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterization of the fistula.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Various accidents cause fissures in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not benefit from your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a knife as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the depth of the wound should be according to the thickness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully over those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that wet compress until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of the uvula or the palate or the roots of the teeth, bleeding occurs and it is then clamped and becomes old and a fistula forms and you treat it but do not allow healing, then ignite a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and insert that fire into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand bring the burning flame to its depth, doing this once or twice; and take care of that compress as we have said about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; but if not, it will be necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupt bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX:**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then place the patient's head in a low position, and shape the cautery so that it can be inserted between the tooth and the gum, applying the hot cautery quickly so that the patient feels only a slight pain from the heat of the fire, aiming for the root of the tooth to be freed.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and do this for an hour, after which they should spit it out, because the loosened tooth will be securely held in place, the gums softened will tighten, and the moisture corrupted will be dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery should be performed in two ways: either with a cow's gut cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow's gut involves taking a piece of cow's gut and slicing it open lengthwise, then wrapping it around the base of the tooth, heating it over fire, and applying it to the painful tooth while keeping it warm until it is numbed by cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or cloth in the wound of your side, place it over the painful tooth, and place the ignited iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization is to address the wound of a tooth or iron, and it should be performed gently in the heart of the wound without the heat reaching the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth and rest your hand on it until the cautery cools; do this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide with the aid of this cautery, holding it for an hour and then spitting it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have seen it necessary to do.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by a mixture of fluid and humors that are resistant to treatment by medicines, and you wish to reduce them slightly, apply the cautery along the shape of which this follows, having two sharp ends so that smoke comes from the cautery on one side, and you apply the glowing end over the affected area once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the center of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and then leave it for three days, applying a hot compress to the area around it until the burned tissue has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that healing ointment and bandages until it is cured.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the tube or pointed cautery for this purpose is conveyed thusly.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of ulcers and the constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled due to congestion, it is necessary to evacuate that illness at the beginning with purgative medicines, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to damage the pleura with the cautery or inflame the patient's chest, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply a hot iron or another cautery to the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The hot iron, used in the previous manner, is also the method here.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that as mentioned, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung ailments and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung ailments are caused by excessive humidity, and the patient has no fever or sputum, and the condition is chronic, apply two hot irons over the furcula in the areas where the lungs are weak and inflamed; another iron at the middle part of the foot between the two mamillos; follow the method described previously for applying the iron.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the pointed cautery called a 'punta', whose shape precedes the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make incisions within these; and then carefully treat that with the remedies that are mentioned so that it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that end: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the titillium, which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and it does not stick in its return time, you should reduce its dislocation until it is as it was first, and then place the patient on their back or side; and lift the limb that was affected inside the titillium towards the top with your hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two points; this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the wound where it penetrates into another part; and the form of the cauterization will be when using three cautery points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so these are subtle according to the amount of effort; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this rule, and these are the eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place the entire cautery with salt on it, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the member for any time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then this cauterization is made on the muscle with a hot iron cautery or with pointed metal cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the pain is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When inflammation of the stomach occurs and moisture fills a space inside that is detached from its surroundings, and if treatment methods are continued without addressing it, one will see that the illness will rest on their back, spreading to their limbs and organs, and should be cauterized with three cauterizations: one leaving a mark on the foot the size of a finger as a cautery, and two others on either side of the back costae of the cautery, forming a triangular shape; widen those that are not properly aligned, which will cause putrefaction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, following this form; and this should be a circular cautery, as shown here.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it, as this cautery frightens some: you know how much puncture you want over the stomach and then cauterize that with cautery on the punctures; and then tend to that with care according to the treatment that precedes healing.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII.**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein occurs due to coldness or moisture or violent wind, and the condition deviates from its normal course through excessive discharge, the illness is treated as we have said, and one should not apply binding, but rather ensure that the illness is lifted over its head, and then make three punctures according to this form and with this quantity on the vein beneath the hypochondria, which brings about the supine position of the patient.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cautery itself should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not be tempted by the sharpness of the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is adhered corresponds to the amount of the specificity of the cord, and it is not too tight; and if the malady stands on the patient's feet; or if it is not on their feet, then they should sit down, whose things have already been spread out, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and let the heat of the iron affect all parts of the body so that it penetrates within the intestines, because the tongue here is delicate; and you should know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the abscess on the leg needs to be incised and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the leg or in the tunic covering it, if it is in the flesh, the disease causes great gravity and increases the intensity of the pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the leg, the pain is usually more intense and often exhausts the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is towards you; then identify the site of the hernia; and apply the pointed cautery which resembles a rag, whose shape was previously described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with these cauterizing irons until all the wound is closed, so that it heals properly and doesn't open again.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And know that you should only use these cauterizing instruments as described in medical studies, and those which have proven effective for many ailments; however, through experience, they can be dangerous during this operation, but we must still adhere to them, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix. (Note: The exact translation would depend on the context provided, but keeping it as is per your request.)
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They say that the ancient cauterization of pleurisy according to this method is done by taking a long, thin blade from the school of surgery and cutting it to the desired length, corresponding to the thickness of the said part.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that in oil and heat it, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauteries below, slightly declining from the point where the beard is left off, and two cauteries at an angle between the fifth rib and the cartilage, declining slightly towards the back parts; another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries in the back parts; and one cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area in use.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauteries that resemble rays and ignite them, placing them in the space between the ribs, aiming to alleviate this pain and heal it, as we have said regarding the pain in the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this procedure with cautery, there is no cause for concern, as it often happens in the affected area of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On cauterization of the melza (or mucosa).
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the mucosa using what we have mentioned about treatment in division and do not apply your cure, then use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the mucosa according to the figure of the cautery burns on the foot, the shape of which has previously been described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the thickness of each cautery should be about the size of a finger or slightly less, and the method of the cautery is the same as we have described for the cautery of the leg.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery, and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterization: if you light the cautery with two directions, it causes a dislocation of the muscle as we have described in the chapter on the treatment of muscle slippage, raising the tie that is at the end of the sheet where the patient's left side lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the tie according to the length of the body, so that cauterization is done according to the extent of the affected area.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then interlace the two rods, ignite them with fire, in that place where they penetrate the tie from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three parts.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should care for the cauterized wounds so that they do not break open for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization does not catch gout but rather the inflammation itself properly speaking.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating gout, follow the treatment methods we have discussed in the previous section, but be aware that you should cauterize with four cauteries around the affected area and one cautery each on the stomach, the thigh, the chest, between the spine of the back, and directly below the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the sensitivity of the patient's skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then apply the cautery gently so that it does not burn for too long.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the hernia from treatment just yet, as the cautery should cover it to prevent two complications and it will be healed with the help of medical aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to treat the stomach should be made in the form that corresponds to its previous state, and it is this one which has the olive-like shape used to treat the back, according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of Feet and Other Parts.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in water and filled with yellowish water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the sole between the big toe and the little finger, and hold the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely remove it, for the yellowish water will discharge.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be done as follows: Then apply two cauteries to the two parts, and make a cut with the tip of the cautery on each part.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the part: one should be placed on the inner side and the other on the outer side of the part; and two cauteries should be placed on each part.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then attend to those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Capitol .xxxiii.**
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal parts are infected and filled with pus, it is due to the digestive and retentive humors located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated using curative methods, sometimes exhibiting injuries from the application of heat. Here, a large cautery is applied over their stomach as previously mentioned in the treatment of the stomach (cauterization), with circular cauteries and four small ones around the subtle belly button; or alternatively, two cauteries can be used on the larger stones, or one on each of two stones.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If excessive humidity and the illness tolerate it, then apply a cautery to the anus and intestines, strongly securing two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for a young person from which one does not stray.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .XXXIV. (This indicates the section or chapter number, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in a natural state, old hemorrhoids, caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, can be treated with the methods mentioned earlier, but if that does not provide relief, then cauterize them using three cauterization tools over the abscess at the small of the back, and another cautery on the navel for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If it is observed that the patient's stomach has become chilled and their food is not digesting properly, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach using a large cautery as mentioned before; also apply one cautery on the bowels, and another cautery on the patient's chest with a clavicle cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time to allow healing.
Capitol .xxxv.	I am unable to provide a translation for this line as the context is missing and it does not appear to be part of the medical treatise. The previous sections were focused on treatments for specific conditions, while "Capitol .xxxv." does not contain any discernible medical content.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cautery for hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove hernias, you use the cautery that resembles a ray of light.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert that flame into the hernia you have removed and continue to hold your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointment until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old, with corrupted health and moisture, it is most worthy to attempt to heal it subtly, and then slowly apply the quantity according to the depth of the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Near the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intertwines with the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are consumed once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be wary of the combustion of nerves and veins; if there is a fistula in the body of the bladder or in the hernia cavity, be careful of all these places; and do not attempt this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you believe it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials that caused it are removed from it, and they remain like this for a long time, then you know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from within the body, then you know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting its place, or it falls victim to those causes of which there will be remembrance in that location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize them using a hot iron over each ulcer, especially those that require memory (or permanent marking) with a cautery clamp.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should strongly cauterize according to the second method, leaving a small mark, so that there will be three lines of cautery, and thus more healing later on.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the opening where the discharge occurs, beginning on the lower part of the bladder, and cauterize with a point on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery from the lower part of the back, or two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be driven in according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the liver.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When liver pain is caused by friction and moisture, which prevents conception, corrupts the menstruation, delays their flow, and causes severe pain during their discharge, then know that this location must be cauterized with three cauteries in a circle around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; or two cauteries at a lower point on the back, and drive them in firmly.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus infiltrates the joint of the ankle, causing it to dislocate, a sign of this is that one part appears longer than the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is compressed in him quickly.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle with a circular cautery, since you have already tried to straighten the joint by pulling on its circuit, and thus the dislocation falls back into place in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above has the same form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the vein; and be careful with that which is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli. (Forty-first Chapter)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the region of the ankle, caused by cold, moisture, and inflammation, the condition is treated with the methods we have mentioned and should not be overlooked; furthermore, you must remove the affected part from thick humors using putrid pills or artificial ones similar to them, and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery on that part follows two ways: either with cauterizing medicines that burn, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that over the opening of the anus with three triangular cauterizes in this manner; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the spaces between each cauterize should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cauterizes are olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, four cauterizes may be placed on the middle part of the anus for better effect.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle that follows the shape in the cauterization of the hernia of the anus, which should be a complete circle and burn away all the openings of the intestines.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in cases where pain is attached to the anus and not spread throughout the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is stretched within the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the thigh at the place where you direct the pain; and apply a cautery to the shin for four days on the outer side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain spreads to the place near the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery at three points or four or more, as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain when moving the thigh, then cauterize that area with a cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not injure nerves or cause great pain, and that by doing so to the patient, you do them no further harm or restrict their movement.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those which will be cauterized on the shin and finished in the cauterization process, and a heated bed with an inflated pillow until the swelling reaches the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then I apply a strong acid solution of the abdomen, and this brings about death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or almost a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, another one is drawn, which is one-third of the original; and the space between them should be the length of a night's rest; and these circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those sides should be a night or two nights, and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Soon as it is heated over a fire until it glows and sparks, then place it gently on the wound, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so, it is cauterized with three round cautery burns at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then apply this for three days; cover the wound with a poultice and leave it open for several days; and take care to keep the area clean until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, sons, we have seldom used this kind of cautery because of the fear surrounding it, and because few have found those that guard over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	One should apply the best cautery to those who suffer from it, and find out the place of their pain.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Perhaps the text is describing a medical procedure for treating a hernia:
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the mentioned part; they should be placed under and over it, and they should hold themselves together in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the part where the patient feels pain in their side, and take some cold water, pour it between two circles, and its quality should be small fire bit by bit, and hold it for an hour, and let the patient endure the bite and adhesion - because that burning bite is like fire - until the bite ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and dry the cold water from all the water with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then apply this for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion disappears, and leave it for some more days, and it will heal; this is better in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the proper treatment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is spread inside the thigh or leg, place him in a position that holds water according to what is done in the equalizing of the waters.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of the water caused, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no extinzione of both parts, then tris them and place them in a new container from which the opening has been perforated, according to the quantity that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the other container with water into the solution of alkali and causes alive, then over that, two handfuls of the hot water from the vessel, and after you have compressed them well with your hand, leave the hot water to flow down from the vessel into the container with the cold water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then carefully adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and renew the alkali, because now it will become a strong remedy of great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterization of other members, for operation uses fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And also among medicines are some that are cauterized widely, thus with greater intensity and more finely, causing a certain knowledge of their mixture.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	A wise old man recounts an operation and cure by which he alleviates the pain of water (perhaps hydrocephalus or a related condition) and sciatica, and marvels greatly at its effectiveness, stating that it requires no other treatment, for once recomposed in bath and rest, the patient is completely healed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	Indeed, it is best to use fresh parsley from a garden, and if none is available, take a small figure; twist it in your hands and place it in the water where the pain resides, whether in the joint or limb or foot, and let it be.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for as long as the patient's condition allows for relaxation from the strain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in water, and when the patient's body is heated, insert that into the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines unless it is for the removal of fluids from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the narrow vein of a goat is cauterized, it benefits the animal; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the foot's toes and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry goat's vein and inflame it over fire until it is charred, and place it on the wool and leave it until it hardens.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this type of cautery is called a cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times, pain in the back is caused by various factors, such as stiffness or bruising, or due to excessive strain or improper evacuation, and for similar reasons, through the infusion of irritating and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not indicated for any other type but this specific one caused by the infusion of irritating matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, for the evacuation of the malady, use pills that resemble them, which are to be administered on each side where the pain is located in three lines according to its extent, making incisions on each line with cautery as much or little as tolerated by the patient and depending on their virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial claw cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	These maladies often appear in young children; and the sign of their onset in children is that their small bodies become stiff due to evening heat, raising and limiting their movements.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last vertebra of the spine and the joints that begin to protrude above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to inhibit it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery across the entire span of the vertebra firmly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then properly tend the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that a cautery is not applied to redness caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout is caused by cold and humid conditions, it is treated with heat and not forgotten the pain, then the application of a hot cautery follows.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is because you cauterize the proper drainage in the joint circuit of the foot with fire cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take a pointed cautery whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain increases within the toes or other joints, and this persists, then cauterize that with three or four cauteries of this olive cautery from any direction.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you use these cauteries as needed, then cauterize that one and do not press too hard with the cautery against the skin, only touch its specific part.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain persists in both feet, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the joints and it is called rheum, then make punctures along the course of the filaments as they twist, punctures on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there are persistent pains in these joints, make punctures along the course of the filaments on each node and on the pinch of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains spread to other joints or muscles, apply cautery to parts all over the body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not discharge the patient without proper care and receipt of medicines, for if good care is taken and the fever is discharged through this cautery, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a section or chapter heading, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the joints and hernia protrudes from the abdominal wall towards the birth canal, at this point, it is necessary to begin by ensuring that the patient abstains from strenuous activity for a period of time, allowing the tear to heal from within the body.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then guide the patient to lie on their side with their leg raised, and instruct them to keep it in that position until the swelling or hernia goes down.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the patient to their original position, and carefully attempt to reduce the rupture over the hip bone, identifying the end of it by its resemblance to a half-circle at the upper joint lines of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then apply the cautery in the shape that is appropriate for this case:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which a moist and warm cloth should be applied.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and focus on the area where you manage to get near the bone of the toe within the middle of the foot; and repeat that another time if it doesn't work in the first attempt near the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to dislocate the hernia and cause death or other serious complications on the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery of children should be delicate according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the site of the cautery for three days, applying bandages until the fire scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the site is sealed and the pain disappears.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care to fast the patient according to the duration of their healing, which strengthens their stomach, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to effort in recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to raise it, after approximately ten days, administer a suitable treatment and maintain it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should also be reduced in work and the intake of food and drinking, and from loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with a cauterization of the hernia using a red-hot iron, according to its size, and this should be done when it protrudes from the abdominal wall; then care should be taken with the treatment as described earlier, and it should not be compressed.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Some have also said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this manner, because it is easily detected and tried.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that they have for the width in the skin above the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is more light and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain ends in other members due to cold or impact persists and does not improve with medication, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the type of cautery for each member should be according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain it suffers.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is cured by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are punctures in members near to that member, so you should achieve these with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leper patients sometimes require cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is characterized by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholia.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you wish to cauterize the patient, consider whether the leprosy is severe and whether it has responded to the treatment mentioned in the previous section, nor has it recurred, or spread, and be wary of the disease that could engulf the entire body and all its parts. Then cauterize the affected area on top of the head with a hot iron: first at the middle of the scalp, then at the second spot beneath it towards the back of the head, reaching the forehead at the end of the hair; and do so in two places forming horns, and also behind, upon the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, with your hand hold the cautery a little within, pressing it against the bone creating a slight impression, and dislocating the tendons so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; cauterize over the compress as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned at the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each eye lid, and two cauteries on both shoulders, and six cauteries on the spine, and five cauteries on the back vertebrae, and one large cautery near the coccyx, and one on the hip bone, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each arm, and two on the muscles, and two on each foot's tendons; cauterize over all the joints of the upper and lower limbs, and on every heel of their feet, and on the grooves of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the foot, do not irritate them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, cautery is performed with a hot iron on the bone of the thigh, and on another part of the stomach's opening, and yet another on the sigmoid colon.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more accurately you perform the cautery, the greater its effectiveness and the less painful it is for the patient; indeed, since the nerves are already numbed due to the previous procedures, the body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take note that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints, as previously mentioned concerning the types of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then, prepare the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies as necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stuck or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and dressings, but remains unsanated, you should cauterize the affected member with a cautery as required by the size or smallness of that member.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the hot cautery should enter the depth of the flesh slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that area with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized that extends to the upper and lower limbs, the spine, and the eyes, which cause pain in those members, and it alleviates the stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not attempt to treat this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the body's members and the emergence of nerves throughout the whole body in motion.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter LXXIX**
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When hemorrhoids are old and do not respond to any of the common medical treatments, then you cauterize them with a pointed iron according to the amount of the specific kind of cloth needed until the white and color of it are reduced and its color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a mixture of flour from beans and lentils with olive oil and arugula leaves, or pigeon's blood or duck blood, each in equal parts, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capital .1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of cracks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and it is desired to remove that growth, cauterize it with a circular cautery along its edge as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more prudent to cauterize it along the edge of the growth with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Final chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of injuries.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an injury takes too long to heal, it may be due to excessive moisture, the condition of the patient, being old and frail with little strength, or time; if you wish to hasten the healing of the injury, cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; then apply a compress to aid in its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make an incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and apply it to the middle of the injury until the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to that place which is most affected, in order that the body of the arm may be relieved; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a creeping corruption in the member which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place which requires cauterization with fire, then you should use hot iron needles, small and large as appropriate for that place where the corrosion is located.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it completely until you have eradicated all the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then bandage it for three days, and apply oil mixed with the ashes to the cauterized places until all the scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then care for it using hot compresses made from fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If the flesh does not heal well in three days, free from corruption, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And it is treated with some sharp medicine several times, for that is half the effect of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is sometimes more effective for removing impurities.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already mentioned the cure for it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you see it coming on again.
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter III**
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Joints and Similar Conditions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motas visible in the parts of the foot affected by malady, which is called a claw, and it is a gross, penetrating condition that weakens the foot; cautery on these is done in two ways, either with hot cautery or with cold cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cautery with fire involves igniting the cautery tool, which is made of iron according to the size of the claw, and it should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then apply the ignited cautery to the claw and carefully rotate your hand with the cautery around the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it starts to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made from crushed wild mallows mixed with salt to the affected area and leave it for one night so that it eradicates the root cause.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a wound healing ointment made from animal fat until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not improve and ulcers appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must apply these cauterizes with hot water. Take a small piece of iron or a pen or a turning wheel, and place it over the joint; then dip the tip of the instrument into hot water, and with your hand compress it firmly against the affected area, constantly turning the edge of the instrument around the joint's root, until you see the water flow out. Wait for about an hour while the patient endures the biting sensation of the hot water, and then remove it; the joint will be rid of its inflammation.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And also, for those who have these issues, it is done to ensure that all of them are completely healed.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat the abscesses that have been eliminated from the joint roots with ointments made from materials that promote healing of the flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter a tremor caused by friction or pressure on the nerves, or due to fever or any other similar cause, you should apply four cauterizations or two cautery irons over each spinal column; also cauterize the foot of the patient and the stomach with olive cautery irons.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient will cease and hasten the healing of the afflicted illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white spots appear, and pustules are formed from coarse corrupt matter; therefore at the beginning when you see an appearance, cauterize it over all parts of the fistula with a subtle cautery or a reed torch, the tip of which is extended towards fire; or cut off with a long knife; or cauterize with a lenticular.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cauterization is also performed at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; they are not rigid, and the surplus matter is removed, doing those, and healing from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it may be necessary to cover that this should be done with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of flux of gangrene through incision of the arc (or tendon).
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Various observed phenomena must flow from archery, which cut through the wound to be healed, or from the beginning of abscesses or cauterization on a member, and then they appear similar, and it is difficult to maintain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, you must use your hand over the wound from the impact of the archery, and place it as indicated to stop the flow of blood until the swelling has subsided.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply hot olive oil cautery, both small and large in number, over these until they are covered with fire.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or large one according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly pour the heated oil you have prepared, and cauterize it until it is incised and restricted that flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you remove the cautery and extract it, take another cautery carefully from among those prepared over the fire, and do not cease to do this again until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to injure the nerves here, which may lead to further harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the bleeding, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are cut off, the bleeding is restricted and the sanction is confined; or by binding it tightly with twine or ligament due to strong compression, or by applying medications of which the virtue is to constrict the blood; and these should be strengthened with a pillow or in a suitable manner.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a moderate restriction of it with bandages or by the position of burning causes and similar ones, does not bring relief but merely pain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open the indicated site on the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within, so that the blood may be stopped from the sovereign outbreak of the plague, and above all, do not let the pain return; and afterward, sprinkle hot water with great frigidity within until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then consider what cautery or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second step.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incision and perforation, poultices and phlebotomy, wounds, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter, we have discussed all diseases in which fire cauterization is indicated, along with their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauterization. I have organized the chapters from head to foot.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter in such a way that it alleviates what the patient desires, whenever he has asked for it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin, remember that this chapter is about the treatment of fear, which is discussed in detail in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you must be extremely careful in the operation discussed in this chapter, which involves frequent catheters evacuation due to the presence of sand or foreign objects in which life is at risk, you must perform irrigation of the vein or incision over the abscess or inspection for discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of the pelvis and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And among all of those, there are fear and trembling, and in most of their hearts, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall upon you, for sometimes you must be on your guard against the ways of men, as well as against the violent ways of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is from them that you must learn about their illness and how to ward off death, since you must consider the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and the duration of their illness, for the illness itself signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is from those that give to you hope and say, "Expect health," that their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you in this manner; let your caution be greater than their trust and their greed. Do not presume any cause regarding them, but rather, through certain knowledge that verifies it for you, and to which a praiseworthy succession is owed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your illnesses the diagnosis and indication of that which is turned to health, for it aids you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this distinguished chapter into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you regarding whatever you inquire about and need from it.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness often presents itself in children during teething, and when the blackness touches the child's head, it is a sign of danger.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times it is necessary to probe gently because of a hidden cause that is not apparent.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This disease is often seen in children, and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work done on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified so that he could not lay down on his side because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until fire death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the spine and the bone, or it is added beneath the bones upon the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that one if the moisture is between the spine and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a fissure in width, and the length of the fissure should be enough for the moisture to flow through, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is further increased and the abscess grows larger, there are two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity withdraws from the bone, a sign of it is that you see the commissures of the lips completely open and the water is squeezed when you press with your hand inside and it does not hurt you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut into the middle part of the head in three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract the incision completely to remove all humidity; then tighten the cracks with bands and compresses; then drill into it above with a needle and oil within five days, and loosen the stitches and treat the wound with attempts and ointments, and hold the head firmly equalized; and feed the patient dry bread with little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another incision technique which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and perform it as best as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive to achieve flow of blood and stop the patient's suffering through the evacuation of humors.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries which are close to the auricles, called hilisseys.
Capitol segon.	**Chapter Second.**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an emergency or sudden pain in the ears or feet, and it is ancient and does not respond to medical treatments, then the last remedy for this is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus you cover when you want to incise where the illness has raised its head, and then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and afterwards tighten the collar of the illness with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places which are appropriately the most delicate, and they remain hidden from some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then pay attention to the artery with a probe, and incise each one with the scalpel at the point where the incision enters the bone, and do this according to the extent of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the scalpel into the artery and twist it to the incisions made above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be such that when a vein is incised, the blood flow stops immediately, which would otherwise escape frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the waist, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully insert the probe into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you get from the wound is a quantity of one wine-unce, and it cannot be more or less, and all this depends on the extent of the patient's malady and the recoil of the arrow in them.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then consider the plague, and if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, carefully cut it off to prevent gangrene.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully care for it until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migranes occur due to a combination of humoral imbalance and the quality of the tears in the temples, or sudden old age that resembles these, and conventional medical treatments do not help, we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of performing the operation and extracting those is to address the pain that arises in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple where it is shown by its pulsation, and it is concealed from most people due to its violence.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is concealed, then tighten the pain's collar with some cloth; and apply friction to the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you see the artery appear manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the thread with your scissors as easily as possible to reach the arrowhead; and take it out of the wound and extract the piece with your fingers while removing the cloth that is left behind from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, you wrap it with your finger at its end, and then cut it in a single piece according to the amount by which its ends are extended and contracted, and if not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then empty the vessel of blood three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arrowhead is large, you cover it with a bandage made of two strong threads of silk or cord, and do not allow it to putrefy before the wound heals and the blood flow starts.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it after they have been incised, and hold in place that part of the work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a cold and wet condition; for cauterization is one of the causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the arteries that you have removed from their original position, and place them properly on it, and apply a suitable amount of dry medicines to promote healing and stop any bleeding within that they are sane.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another complication occurs in the form of bleeding from the artery, then immediately tighten that blood flow, either with a cauterization or by filling the space with something, and hold your hand over it until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present to you, then hold your tongue over the area until the swelling subsides, and apply water with a strong coldness to the place until its sensitivity ceases, and tie it tightly as appropriate.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter to extract from the wound, because you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have cleaned both places with attempts, and ignite some, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of it can be elongated, since they are not strengthened by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sensitivity of both edges is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if it has a sharper sensitivity than two edges, it is better, because if it is sharp with two edges close to each other, it does not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of fire is retained in those areas and the flesh is slightly separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and is most gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two bones should be considered regarding the thickness of that part.
Capitol quart.	Upper quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic eye sores.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic eye sores, it is the veins on the surface of the head that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition can be identified; the patient's face appears discolored and they experience a sensation similar to walking on ants, their eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point where their eyelashes become uncomfortably sticky, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears. Traditional remedies used in treating such conditions are ineffective.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three cuts in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut is two digits: one cut should be equally spaced from the middle of the nose on the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids that are in the tear duct, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful at the beginning of the jawbones, which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each cut is three digits, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife with its two sharp points, which is the shape of the incision for this one.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the face of the bone, and then make this cut from the first incision into the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then take this knife and insert it into the first incision again, using another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the bone, cutting along the ligament between the bones, and sever all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appears from the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the flow of blood stops, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the sanction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a small piece of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and it is important that it does not develop gangrene cautely.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then apply to it a mixture of basilicum, rose oil, and other herbs until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text you've provided ends abruptly, making it challenging to discern its meaning or continue the translation. The term "Capitol" could refer to several things, including a place name or a technical term related to anatomy or medicine, without additional context. To provide a more accurate translation, a clearer passage would be required.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding through cathartics and the descending pain from sources within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When catarrh comes on suddenly and severely, and the patient's feet are exhausted and their skin is weakened, and the eyelids become ulcerated along with the hair of their scalp, and a sharp pain appears in the head leading to subsequent discharge, then be aware that these symptoms do not come from external sources but rather from veins within the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to clean their forehead, and then cut a fissure at the middle of the forehead, slightly toward the left temple compared to the right one; make an incision within the bone; and with your hand, remove the clotted blood from the temples which are better drained after mastication.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the pus with a sponge or clean cloth and then gently press between the two lips of the fissure using a soft, clean bandage or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then sprinkle on them a powder moistened with wine and oil to prevent infection from occurring quickly.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the infection has already decreased, then rub the bone within it where the pain begins, and treat it with a dry regimen to make the flesh not swell, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colfa (a type of herb) and mix them together, creating a paste that is applied to these wounds from the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what afflicts the auricles (or possibly the ears).
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that afflicts the auricles is one of four species, either it is a mineral or a similar cause to a mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is from plants like rye or beans, or it is a fluid cause like water and wine mixed with them, or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when catarrh appears in the ear or any other cause resembling those that do not adhere or inflame the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the catarrh is discharged, it distills into some cause of violet oil or myrrh, then administer the extraction from it, and make the nose blow in a condition suitable for the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then hold the external part of the ear to some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear towards the back, as warmth is often forgotten due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if warmth is not gained, then administer the extraction of it using an instrument called a gentle epichorionic, whose form is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten using the gesture, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very thin instrument with double folding.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a cannula of aram and insert the end of the cannula into the canal of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula opens.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the small wind with strong attraction, as we have seen with these examples.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot coals or some old apparatus with which the tools are heated, place a small amount on the end of the instrument, and wrap it neatly around the limb.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal with ease and remove the ear from the humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if all the causes we have seen are not forgotten, then you should cut off that which causes abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of amputation is that you begin by cauterizing the malady from the saphetic vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the edge towards the parts above, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the thickest part of the malady is pressed against.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure reaches the pear (toes), and the toe is discolored, stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly make the cut at that time, and treat the wound until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the toe is one of the swollen and inflated gratings (tissue), then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not obey my advice, then take some gentle suction with a small tube according to this method:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that grating (tissue) which has fallen into the toe.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by heat, place it on heavy weights, or extract it with incisions or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for this facilitates its extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In water into which the ear has been immersed, there is a remedy for this condition at the beginning, and it fills the ear with some very thin straw or similar material, and then you should press on the ear in which the water is, and if it is thus expelled, it is good; otherwise, take some small stones and lions according to their length, warm them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump on it with one foot, striking another stone against the one inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, continue this with the stone until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water has been drawn out thus: take paper or cloth and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until the whole length is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then take another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is drawn out, and stretch that over the eardrum as they call it in the extractor from stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body from the ear, if it is small and resembles one of those already mentioned, treat it as we have said in the previous division; but if it is a large object that causes an obstruction to the sense of hearing, then perform the extraction with forceps and scissors, and the cause should be removed as lightly as possible from all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms that have formed in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not follow up your care, then be aware to protect the ear from sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with your fingers or some subtle tools, but if no cause appears, take a narrow cannula and make it wide on both ends, the shape of which is like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the subtle end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient suffers; and with a strong suction, suck it out, making movements until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey these instructions, then fold and close the end of the cannula with wax as we have said; administer distilled liquids that have already been prepared in ancient remedies for worm treatments, which you will find in the treatise on distills.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your flow be the one that pours medical oils into the ear using this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or brass, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and flatten it on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is with the use of what is in the cavity of the container that this procedure becomes necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it at the decent end, then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing aid, or juice from some herb, or any substance from these medicines in the canula — it is in the ear —, and then insert the ray into the coil above and press with your hand to create compression, so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing aid and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should already be scorched with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distil in the ear is not too harsh, for the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear infections.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, children's bellies can become infected without any apparent reason, and this also happens in some adults, an ear infection due to a plague or flesh damage in that area; and this infection can sometimes occur at the base of the ear lobe, which is not always felt, or it can be external.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And those that occur at the base, which do not understand the cause, are in the most difficult situations to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in those where you can see the cause, take the patient's ear to the sun and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if there appears an increase in volume, open that thin blade of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of the blade where the width is reduced is pointed on one side and not on the other, and the blade has two sharp edges so as not to hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the swelling is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the blade itself, then use those delicate scissors and cut with a sharp ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the base of the ear, take a thin needle, heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you feel a swelling that the patient perceives as easy to drain, because of urgency, apply pressure to the swelling to facilitate drainage; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the appropriate bandage on the wound, covering it with a clean cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the sore; or soak some and apply it to the affected area, using it every third day; if the sore has already formed pus, be careful not to spill it and replace it with other clean cloth soaked in oil, as long as the pustule gradually subsides; and tend to that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a flux of blood occurs, immerse a cloth or drape in warm water and apply it to the wound; use another method of treatment that stops the flow of blood, as described in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	**Capitol VIII.**
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of atrophy affecting the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Dry the eyelids of the eyes with some humidity at times, sometimes they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So you should have those tenacled or hooked instruments, and cut off the spikes from their roots, and then place your hand over the sites marked with three incisions.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If the pain flows with warm blood, then cauterize those points with a fine, sharp cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to make incisions and return them when there is no cause for their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a serious condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Clouds seen on the eyelids of the eyes have some cause that is assembled into great strength and hardness, and therefore it is called great.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is addition of a thick humidity on the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider when the great swelling appears in the part coming from the eyelid and is increased throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open that small fissure by its width, and remove it from everywhere with ease as you evacuate it; and then suspend that one from above and cut off that one.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you cannot start the incision of it unless you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision little by little, then this will not be noticed for any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, you will adjust it with stitches; and treat it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer much because the pain of the wound restores and incarnates itself.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must delve into its depth, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as necessary at the beginning, and press it from all sides; and if due to some cause the eyelid becomes elongated, do not notice it for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and treat it with incarnated water until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Regarding the treatment of the eye's eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is an inflammation of the eyelid, which is usually caused in childhood and can affect the eyes of adults, leading to their clouding and causing tears to form; and because of this, they cannot see the clarity of the sun due to the tears.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you must perform these actions over their faces all the time, and over their faces while they sleep; and so the eyelids of their eyes remain constantly moist, which has already caused inflammation, and the imminent occurrence of acute pain is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acute pain within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And certain procedures are performed in which the patient's head is placed on a pillow, and a cloth is laid over them, and cold applications are made, according to the amount of pus from the entire operation, and then that is placed over one area, and by pressing with your fingers all around it, more pus is collected in the middle of the circle, and then the application ends in the middle of that area, humidifying the wound with a spatula incidentally on the fissures, so that the fissure does not become larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place in the hollow of your hand that you cut open the cord completely until you reach the cavity, for in the most delicate positions, treatment is done through an opening according to the shape of the white ganglion.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those clothes that you have wrapped around the affected parts outside and twist them with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to press on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the wound and dislocate it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then you adjust the fissure with a little ease until treatment begins; and then remove those clothes as we have said; and take cloths from them in water, mix vinegar and apply them over the area, and cover these with dry powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so, some who tremble take salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to draw out that which is moist from it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is inside so it becomes healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an accident occurs at the infected site while using cautery, then treat it with dressings until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the subject of manual manipulation.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes become inflamed due to the pressing of foreign bodies, and this condition persists, the result is a painful eye and causes frequent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and discomfort in moving the eyes—a condition known as conjunctivitis. It is treated in four ways: either with a hot cautery; or with acute medicine as previously described in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suture; or with canes (as will be explained).
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so take care that you place the head of the patient in a suitable position; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part where the eyelid meets the skin, and let the needle penetrate through the skin toward the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and pull the thread from its place against the eyelid, and turn it to the side.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then, in the space between the eyelid and the skin, carefully trim the hairs with a scissor-like instrument; then extract the thread and place it beneath the eyelid using small pincers or cloth, and press down on the eyelid with your finger, shaping it like a mirthful smile.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the shape should be adjusted according to the amount of inflammation in the eyelid, as it varies among individuals; for those with significant inflammation, a larger incision may be necessary to soften the eyelid.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut open the splint along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the lacrimal duct major to the lacrimal duct minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fracture is near the natural hairline, it should also be as thick as the king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the claw in one of the two corners of the wound, scrape it thoroughly, and adjust the suture at both edges with silk or fine wool thread, clean the pus, and make any excess from the medications adhere to the two eyebrows for some reasons entwined, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then change the suture of the wound every three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without suture, and treat it with something that dries and tightens, as the eyelid should be lifted after the sealing of the wound and the addition of medications; but a tighter suture is better. Thus, I have told you the ancient practices of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, be careful in attending to the patient, as it is a delicate operation, and there is no need to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat it, where one sees a figure like a grain of mulberry on the eyelid, and then raises the eyelid with three precise incisions, separating and bringing it together in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, having the incisions, and it is not similar to what has been described, then take an agule with a thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and then insert the other two threads close to the lacrimal canals, the first closer to the larger canal, and the second closer to the smaller one, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal in length, and then with your hand at the same elevation as before, lift the entire eyelid as we have recomposed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is clean.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs after your incision or fistula, treat it with wax and similar materials, and apply heat to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, it is necessary to treat the eyelid when its hair turns, so use what we have mentioned regarding incision; however, stitching can be more artificial in some instances.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Inserting needles is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have mentioned; then, with art, insert two needles or two thin threads whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and the width of their passage should be proportional to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each piece where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Nearby, add some subtleties beneath what exceeds from the upper eyelid, constrict the canals of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the cord will die due to the tightness and will be deprived; it will then fall by itself when it has weakened.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and treat the infection until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two canals according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of sharp hairs from the body, especially when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard, and sharp in the flesh, then the operation on them requires that you use a fine needle, rest it on that delicate scale of silk and lion's fur, and adjust the extremities of the device very gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the silk threads should be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another very fine thread beneath it shortly, and adjust the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head in a small position near the sun so that your work can be seen, as it is a delicate and precise operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it as needed, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out from its roots and insert it into the oil, taking care that one or two or three hairs are enough and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then gently pull your hand away, allowing the hair to be extracted from the oil into the eyelid, along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the oil is not extracted with the hair but remains on the eyelid, reapply the oil to the areas you have treated until it is completely removed from the wound above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then examine the wound, since you will remove the oil and the faithful (bandage) and clean any debris or dirt in the wound, and leave the bandage for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and a new layer of skin forms over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is very short, you adjust a longer natural hair, raised to that point where it should be elongated, and then you raise that one.
Capitol .xiii.	**Capitol XIII.**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	**Of the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.**
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	**When you notice a condition on the eyelid, which is characterized by its contraction when the eyelid is closed, to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cauterization, and it is called lepra, this condition is either natural or accidental, caused by the healing of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar to them.**
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	**The method of operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the lips, placing them in a position where there is space between them, like a pocket of cloth, and then bind them together until they heal.**
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out; for if you do so, you will only make it worse, and in no time at all, there will be even more trouble.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use one of those causes that softens as well, such as fenugreek, and boil it in water in which the seeds have been ground finely or mix with oil, apply a compress to that area, and treat it thusly.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce through all means that are not solidified according to the form in which it began.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but a correction of the imbalance that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Regarding the treatment of a hematoma on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hematoma, which is formed on the eyelid and is often referred to as a black eye, is not properly called a hematoma; it can be either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental hematoma can be caused by a blow, a cut, a burn, or other similar events.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left tear duct to the right one, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart from its sides using the needle and cut with a scalpel when you have freed it with the needle, making sure to use a wide blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the lid of the eyelid to its proper position if it is closed; otherwise, take a pin and press it into the split, then turn the eyelid over and make both slits in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both slits should be at two angles of the incision you have made, where they meet, and by making their angle there, the figure of them becomes complete.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure resembles the Greek letter lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then press the flesh with your thumb as much as is needed to close the eyelid, which is what we call the palpebra.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with the thread; and next, apply the treatments we have mentioned for softening medications and cold compresses to ensure healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase the opening with a cut, suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as mentioned before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the mucous membrane between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discourse on incision when it is above or below, allowing it to flow during the operation, according to how it is prepared in terms of incision, and that is in a variety of forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares tricks in every possible way so that within he can return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treat that malady according to what suits him for the operation and tools in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in most people, the eyelid seems to be solidified on the white part of the eye, preventing the ease of movement and its natural functions; therefore, it is necessary to insert your finger between the eyelid and the sclera, and elevate the eyelid towards the upper part or extend it with pressure.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert a thin spatula to separate the adhesion, not using sharp incisions, but rather blunting it slightly so that the patient feels no discomfort during the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye's sensitivity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should carefully remove that adhesion, facilitating the return of the eyelid to its natural position, and healing all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the affected area salt water with which you wash; or distill sun-heated oil dissolved in water into it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then you separate the eyelid from the eye with warm water, and place over the eye a woolen compress infused with egg white, and on the third day use consolidating causes while it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI.**
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	**On the Knowledge of Clouding and Protrusion of the Membranes of the Eyes.**
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that clouding is in two manners: either it is nervous, resembling a delicate hard shell, or non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when pricked forces itself out, and the point does not remain in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until the major tear duct, as it gradually covers the sight, prohibiting light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of working in the incision of the eye is that the patient fixes their gaze downward, and the doctor opens the eyelids with his hand, raises the upper eyelid with his thumb, and carefully extends it over the lower eyelid.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and, using a horsehair or a similar thin material, carefully pass the needle through the center of the eyelid, extending it towards the edge, piercing the eyelid with the needle, and binding it with the thread; stretch that to the sides, and excise the hair at the edge of the eyelid which is obstructing the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you continue to remove the hair within the eyelid's fold.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then carefully cut the lint in the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors, and expose the tissue of the natural tear duct so that by cutting of that one does not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some also apply the ointment to the inflamed area as it is extended or hardened, as we have said, and then carefully scrape off the excess with a sharp spatula, which is the form of this one.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause it to rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, place a little salt or a fine cloth over it and leave it for another day; then carefully tend to it until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the inflammation is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place, then look for this special type of inflammation to be cured with medicines, and so it is healed as you see fit and cut off at the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise it, open the wound of the patient and take a thin piece of sharp iron according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If, however, it becomes hardened and is resistant to the incision, then distill from your time in the wound with a sharp tool of pure vinegar or strong alcohol or salt water, and keep the wound closed for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the operation on that part until everything that is foreign is removed, otherwise a foul wound will form in the wound, for if you leave it, the infection will spread until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that part until it heals.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The importance of the lacrimal gland, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended immediately; and incise it from one side, without finishing the incision so as not to interrupt the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill the main lacrimal gland carefully and make incisions until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and on what is born from attached flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases, in the eyes of certain individuals, there is born infected flesh, which presses over the pupil or draws near to it on the eyelids, and strongly pulls the eyelids apart, as if by a harness.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The surgical procedure involves the patient holding their thigh with one hand while another assistant holds their leg, and yet another assists on their chest, thus immobilizing them; open the wound, collect all the infected tissue using scissors suitable for this purpose, either with forceps or a basket; cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful of the wound, lest you damage it during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be the one that incises these or excises the pus we have extracted during the operation on the finger, or small forceps collected with great care according to the shape of it, as this chapter will explain.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So, once your incision is complete and all that infected flesh has been removed, fill the wound with salt or sprinkle it with a powder made from herbs similar to corrosives used in medicine, then apply a clean bandage over it, ensuring there's no risk of post-operative abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of inflammation from a foreign body and it is accompanied by severe pain, then you should examine the wound and treat that ulcer with something that will heal that ulcer, and continue with that treatment until the ulcer is healed, and do as seems best for the attached flesh that has occurred in this specific case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Although it may seem that all treatment of this severe wound must be done through natural or accidental means, using a knife, do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member has endured that operation sufficiently.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	**On the Collection of Knowledge in Wounds**
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are hard and resistant to treatment, preventing any attempt at their extraction, and these wounds heal slowly over many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider whether the pain in which you know it is strong and in which there is no other illness known to you, then you will collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to hold their breath while you compress the veins, one or two at a time, according to your discretion. And make that compression subtle and in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or make two compressions gradually on the body in this manner:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And once the veins are compressed with subtle force, and at the right moment, while you watch for the pain to disappear and see that the veins are filled with blood and are pulsating.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to cause pain in the joints of the foot; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun rises, be very firm in your operation, piercing only the veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distil the best verdigris or rust onto what has been removed from the wound.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to gather all of that at that moment, then apply a poultice to it, which relieves the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and the risk of abscess is averted.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the process according to the nature of the disease until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the method for forcels:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of enlarged nostrils.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you rise from rest using cautery or sharp medicine according to the description of the condition and it is not cured, then there is no improvement in it unless you make incisions over the affected area after evaluating its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then use a tool whose shape is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp cap, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded so that it can be punctured with a lime or alkaline substance through subtle punctures (as shown in the following shape).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand slowly until you know that corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And in this case, some times are made, and then the area is restored to its causes using drying and astringent agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there is good flesh in it, and it is separated from the healthy and sound body for forty days, and it is not renewed or aggravated, and no further accidents occur to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if this is not the case, then it is not in the bone but rather to reduce the fissure to its original shape, and according to this manner: you must expose the bone either by surgery or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should first be extended within the extremity to the same extent.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place your hand over it, specifically on the bone near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little way towards the thigh, and rotate your hand within so that it penetrates entirely through the bone, and feel the pain as the air escapes from where your hand is.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that dry out as it has been taught to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh around the area has hardened, the matter that was discharged from the parts outside returns to the nose, thus this is considered lighter regarding the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the bulge in the thigh.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the bulge in the thigh appears to its full extent and does not occur due to an abnormal protuberance or reduction, you must understand that you are dealing with a serious illness. Then return (the patient) to their bed, and continue to follow this course, and also ensure that there are no air bubbles in the scarification and suction for good drainage; then apply over the bulge a liniment made from catnip and aloe and fennel seeds and sarsaparilla, and tighten the bandage over it with motes (powders).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is to take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is folded in half then into quarters; make these from the fur.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity needed for the treatment.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten them with a strong, stiff cloth; repeat the suction for bleeding and scarification; remove the ventoses and leave the bandage tight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes relaxed, be sure it is made very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And leave the ligament as we have said, both during the day and night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, well; otherwise, repeat the application of powders, binding, and suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	**Capitol .xxi.**
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uvular tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When an incision is to be made in the uvular tunic, and it becomes prominent, you should proceed with the eyelids as if they were a cover, and form them in the shape of a man, and wish to make an incision here, then the operation on him is as follows: you insert the needle at the edge of the uvula from below, and then another needle through which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and let this penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then make an incision in the place of the double thread and lift that piece of the uvula along with the needle, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle, placing it over the humid wool soaked in honey, and wait until the thread drops off the uvula.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something comfortable until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, a large amount of fluid is collected from all parts around the swollen joint's prominent edge, and then it is punctured with a thin needle that reaches the center of the swelling, and the albumin liquid flows out, and the swelling decreases and subsides.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it so that it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De curacio de alconati.	**On the Healing of Alconati**
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This condition known as alconati is not truly a sickness but a healthy swelling that resembles water flowing from the joint, and it is not [what we] think it to be.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to stop the swelling on the affected joint and right side, then place your hand over its head from both sides, and press where you see the fluid coming from in the spaces between the thighs, and prevent it from discharging, and hold it there, and the swelling will disappear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient stop between your hands and take a delicate knife and cut through that which is surrounding the hernia just below the continuation of the conjunctiva in the tunica (at the desired location), so that the hernia can be removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is removed, pour the warm water into which you have mixed honey or water in which fenugreek has been boiled with honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it for other causes as well, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the knee.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have discussed the properties of water in its parts and what is suitable to pierce with the needle, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must cut the patient between your thighs over a cloth and tie their limbs tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the patient's eyelid, if the water-bearing limb is the left; or your right hand, if it is the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take hold with your right hand, if the limb is on the left side; or your left hand, if it is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then hold the end of the cloth near the edge of the eyelid, according to the thickness of the tear in the corner of the eye, and then pull the cloth with your hand in a gentle and revolving motion.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the wound's flesh and feel that the healing has already been achieved due to sight.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of healing to the point be the same as the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the edge of the wound; for you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place the healing within the area where there is water, and throw it down once, then lift it up again; thus, when the water descends, you will see the malady upon which the patient's sight was focused at first, and healing in their wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest for a little while; so if the water has descended, you will rest again before the healing is completely cast.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is stuck and will not descend, you extract the Almagest with ease, turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve a small amount of pure salt gem in water and wash the affected area; then take out the bandage or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and egg albumen and apply this to the sore.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But it is not those of our time who still use this as treatment with egg albumen.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not follow your Almagest in the treatment of the sore due to its hardness—which is one of the reasons why the sore is difficult for many men to bear because of its severity—, then know that you must take the sponge which is called "alberid" whose form is as follows:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore perforate the affected area without ending your hand on the tract, and do not stop until you have made a subtle opening according to the Almagest.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then I insert the maggots as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must prepare the patient's bed properly so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And consider the nature of this condition so that its natural course is not disturbed, and do not force their head to the right or left at any time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And dress the wound according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then I place them in that dark room and banish the bright light, observing their condition, and return to dress the wound on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover this when performing treatments or, if necessary, the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	As you have mentioned that this text is written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, the translation would be: "You have observed that they apply it for this reason because water can leave gently and violently from view due to its great and intense attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	When an abscess occurs cautiously, you will notice that the swelling subsides after the seventh day, and correct any residual abscess with water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you free the sight of it and place your attention on the oral aspect from which it is governed, leaving it for several days, existing in the greatest darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually reduce that darkness, gently conversing about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery one should not excuse the lack of vision at times, and then you must be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached those who are in the art of surgery, and one of them says that fire should be made in the magdaam air (lung) through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you may not have seen this done perfectly in our land, nor is it written about in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of lung so that it is about those who ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or steel precisely, and their ends have this subtile triangular shape, the pointed end similarly so, which is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are diverse types of flesh hidden in the nose, some caused by a growth of many small feet or polyps on the sides, this illness is called polyps because it resembles those feet depicted.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is flesh that is cancerous, lean, and of pale color; and it is this kind of flesh that has the appearance of lion flesh, not of a pale color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of this lion flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you must immediately sever the illness between your fingers and place it in the sun, dry up its nose, and prick the little bumps on those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove that from the parts outside, and separate what you have understood from that subtle action of one part within, knowing that all the flesh is held together; if there is any cause remaining for the amputation, then use this as a tool with subtlety and facilitate its removal without any difficulty.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If there is an acute or chronic abscess, then you should drain it; but if it is a malignant abscess, then you should incise and cauterize the wound where the pus has formed and ensure all cavities are clean.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then, with great care, perform the incision in the nose using a sharp instrument and apply salt water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is blocked and there is fluid buildup inside the sinus cavities, then you know it has healed when you detect no more moisture in the palate.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is still flesh filled with pus surrounding the bones of the nose to which the incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So, you should carefully insert the instrument into where there is any obstruction, and gently turn it in all directions, and between each bone, apply the right or less amount of pressure, and open up the patient and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either by breaking or for another reason that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this is done, it releases its aromatic essence so that it reaches the nasal canals and stays on the throat, as the sight of these actions makes children in schools curious, and it is a light cause for anyone who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then grasp both ends of the thread, one end emerging from the nose and the other piercing through the nostril, and apply gentle pressure to the flesh with the threads, doing this until you know that the flesh is attached to the threads of the nostril.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the thread and insert it into the nostril, applying suction with a calulus until the ointment corrupts everything that is broken in the flesh, doing this for three days or more.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a platinum cannula into the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If the cure ends, use that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the design of an instrument for purging, which distills oils and medicines from herbs:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small lamp with a tiny opening, and insert the material that resembles a small mass.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a tube closed with a plug, just like a cane, and the cannula of the purging instrument should be flat, open; it should have a handle at the end, which you hold when you suck in oils or water from the patient's humors and causes to be sucked out.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgers are precious: prepare from castor husk, white birch, ginger, and safran piletre, long pepper, elecampane, and epazote, mix with vinegar and make pills, and administer one pill in a tepid water to the patient's nostrils.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow from the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The growths, which are like a nail in the ends of the nose, increase and become more noticeable over several days, until the condition is recognized.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this, you must pay attention to the beginning of the appearance of it, and treat it completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply over the area a cautery or medicinal fire, which is located in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its inspection is delayed and it becomes enlarged, consider if it is smooth, hard, of dark color, and has little sensation. Do not touch it with a sharp instrument, for growths that appear in these apostemes carry great evil to the one they affect.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is a serious infection and not of a dark color, in which case incision is possible in all parts of it, then evacuate the evil and cut into that with caution, and treat the place with something that drains and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Chapter XXVI**
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the sewing of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is an accident causing the loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit does this operation confer in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any of these conditions due to a fresh wound or infection, recognize that the two edges of the wound should be brought together with stitches, and then treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the wound separating completely and each one is made healthy, then you must cut each part from its adjacent tissue until it does not protrude further.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust both lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them and cover them with a thin layer of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing, leave it for two or three days, then remove that dressing and replace it with another, until the wound is completely healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique for the suture is that you add the solution to restore continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or by adding the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII**
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	To extract those causes that come in both cheeks inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	These growths are often seen in many people inside their cheeks; some are hard like dried fat from burns, and others are larger and some are smaller.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, he removes the lips and openings of all those hard growths, and then fills the space with a thread-like absorption until the wound is healed, and then cleanses it with vinegar and treats the area with water that has been cooled, until it is cured.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Chapter XXVIII**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the removal of tissue attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	For the removal of growths on the gums that are firmly attached, which were once called albulus, therefore, he suspends them with hooks or holds them with forceps and carefully cuts them out, allowing the healthy blood to flow and the wound to heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply your hand over the area, using sage or other astringent and purgative powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the cause of toothache.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth within and without, as well as between the gums, there are sharp cuts, bruises, and some dark spots, which turn black and cause inflammation to the gums, and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must open the space between your hands and place the head of the patient in a comfortable position, and pull out the teeth in which these sharp cuts and similar causes appear, without any pain, and this is done for their blackness, citrus color, and other conditions until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if there is something left from the beginning of the reasoning, proceed with that; otherwise, repeat the reasoning about those points on other days and in sequence until you reach the final statement regarding what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth often require various types and shapes of cuts according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the scalpel with which the tooth is extracted from its socket is different from the one used to cut between teeth according to other forms. These forms of scalpels should be prepared as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and time in its complete eradication, as there is no reason to delay its removal once eradicated, for it is a sublime substance that justifies the effort in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the disease is compelled to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful; for sometimes the pain appears to come from the diseased tooth itself and seems to be in a healthy tooth, but you extract the one that is diseased and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been extracted, as we have seen this happen through barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know it well, you will see that you sacrifice in the region of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is completely dissolved from the gum of the tooth, and then carefully cut away little by little with your fingers or small forgings until the extraction is complete.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use pliers with strong jaws for good speech or firm sucking, and place the patient's head between your hands that do not hurt it, and carefully pull out the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it or cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it there in every way with ease and effort remove it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should cover it completely with cloth and stretch that thread at the end of a fine needle so that it does not unravel in the hour of your constriction over those teeth as you hold them.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification precisely in the gums on all sides and pay close attention so as not to break or tear that wound, and return to the patient for further treatment if the malice is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless efforts to extract teeth, for they do not administer what we have recommended; often, they cause great pain to men, which is much more difficult to endure than a simple extraction, and leave the roots of their teeth completely damaged or extracted, or some of them, as we have witnessed on many occasions.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are wounds that do not heal, or they become red and swollen, then cut off some amount of cloth and wash over the wound, and if this cloth does not help, use cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The design of the forceps and pliers should be delicate, with which a tooth is extracted from the beginning, having a short handle and a thick grip, so that they do not bend when used for such purposes.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should also be of varying sizes, so that when you begin to use them, those with thicker handles are not bent, but rather shorter ones have thinner ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron, with straight ends, and the ends of these have teeth that interlock with each other and tighten firmly, and sometimes the ends of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak, which is curved, and are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When it is necessary to eradicate a tooth that is firmly embedded due to any cause, you should place your fingers over the area and apply pressure for one or two days until the location becomes softer; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanta.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their ends should be sharpened with a chisel or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey the instructions regarding these pliers or tongs, then you should lie down and expose all the flesh and insert the instrument called a small lever, whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but sharp knife, small in size, and do not cover it so that it can cut effectively.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the incision for this is forgotten, then do so; otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument has an extreme end that is triangular and of some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And with these instruments, having two slopes, the appropriate one for this is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments which are used for shaving teeth; because the work is easily done with this instrument which resembles a large claw, and its shape is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the rounded or pointed end of the tendon, which may be of any thickness, but is not enmeshed, so that it is not strained.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools of the moving teeth are similar in appearance to other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans, in their art, find by themselves the means to cope with various operations and ailments, for which the ancients neither gave nor paused any specific tools, due to the diversity of forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is strained, then apply gentle pressure to it in its proper place using the tools and forceps we have mentioned for removing tooth roots, and assist with the maneuver whose form this illustration demonstrates.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any slight swelling or tightness in the mouth, so that it does not burst or escape, until all bones are completely healed, then restore the area with suitable medicine.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, clean it thoroughly of that debris and from its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol XXXII**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth that stand out among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude abnormally from their natural position, especially in women and particularly young, delicate ones, it is necessary to consider: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, then extract it; but if it should not be attached to another tooth, you should cut it off with this instrument which resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp Indian steel.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made over the tooth in many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not touch any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to the point of erosion, then file it with this iron lime file whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of this should be from Indian iron and the margin precisely; and it should have small, sharp points as with a lime, whose teeth are gradually filed in many days with ease, so that there is no other tooth like it that cuts and injures.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then carefully cut that at the end, and sharpen it with other razors as well.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is the tooth from which a piece has come off and affects the tongue, then you must file until the roughness of that fraction is smoothed out, and apply pressure so that the tongue does not hurt nor does speech become corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter .XXXIII.** (Note: XXXIII represents the Roman numeral 33)
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot strain what they eat, having already treated it with astringent medicines without success, then consider using those that are strengthened with gold wire rather than silver, as silver tarnishes and can no longer be used after a few days, but gold remains unchanged forever.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the restoration is that you take the wire and hold it double between two healthy teeth, and then curve it in a serpentine shape between the two damaged teeth, or if only one or two, so long as the mesh reaches the healthy tooth of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the stitching within the space from which you began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your suture, which tightens the thread, must grasp the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then, with pincers or pliers, you cut off the excess thread and insert it in one place or another with a gesture, and you hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then, with a firm grip, tie it just as tightly as a Roman knot.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, tighten it or those with another thread in the same way for as long as necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the method for teeth and the shape of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as you perform these ligatures:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their proper place in their locations and they are healed as we have recomposed them, and that they heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this can only be done by skilled craftsmen and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes, it is appropriate to use the bones of a cow, shaped like a tooth, placed in the location where the tooth is missing, tightened as we have said, and remaining and serving as that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found in the tongue, sometimes it is natural to which human does not have, or accidental and occurs due to a disease which is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, removing its existence in the testis; and lift up their tongue, and then incise that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any stiffness or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of the plague, then you apply oil and incise it according to its width until you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a fracture in the flesh, and incise here behind the armpit, and let the pus flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the dressing of the incision with hot water or vinegar or with frothy water; and place your hand over the tongue to keep it moist; it is necessary that the patient keeps the tongue in a certain position at night so that it does not become solidified again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flux of blood occurs, stop it with a vetriole (a caustic substance); if the blood flows, cauterize the area with a latiginous cautery suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that cure for the other causes as well, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula (a type of cyst), use a tongue (likely a surgical instrument).
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a condition occurs where the tongue becomes atrophied, resembling a small, stiffened object that prevents it from performing its normal functions; and when severely inflamed, it is greatly swollen within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for it is that you open the patient's mouth wide, facing them towards the sun, and consider the atrophied tongue.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see a thin, dark, hard object which the disease cannot affect, then do not touch that part as it is brittle.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white, indicating moisture, then insert your finger into it, scrape off the thin layer, and cut it completely; and if there is a strong wind during your operation, then place a cloth over it to prevent air from entering, using vinegar as needed to constrict the opening.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work once you have completed it to the satisfaction of the patient, having washed the wound with vinegar and salt; and tend to the other treatment for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Chapter .xxxvi.** (Note: The number xxxvi represents the chapter number, not a part of the text itself.)
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of the apothema (a term likely referring to a growth or abnormality) from two auricles and from that which is nothing in the gullet, and from other apothemas.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When inflammation occurs in the throat, there are glands that are gathered together and protrude outside, and they are called tonsils, which, when you treat them with what we have said in the previous division and it does not heal, consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the abscess is of a red color and the base is thick, do not touch it with iron for the sake of the pus; instead, let it mature within itself, and either it will be drained by itself or it will burst open on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, hard, and the base is thin, then that one needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in view of your operation, if the abscess has rested completely or if it has been reduced to some extent; and then stop the malady in front of the sun, with the head of the patient facing downwards, opening his mouth, and another servant taking hold of the tongue between his fingers, using a delicate instrument that has this shape.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and be subtle with a blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press upon that place and observe its peculiarity, take a hot knife and insert it into the abscess, and draw it out as far as possible outside.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that removes some cause from the tunic, and then cut with an instrument whose form is this...
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled like forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the dangerousness of each of those is in the right of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron then covered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula whose form is like this: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having made one incision, make the other in the same manner of cutting, and then close the incision of the malady with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, treat it with decoction of the peel of an orange or leaves of myrtle and similar things as long as the flow of blood remains restricted, and take care that it heals properly.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, other openings appear in the gullet, or perhaps those two incisions mentioned earlier, and they should be cut according to what has been said about making two incisions equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	You have already treated a woman suffering from an abscess in her throat, which was of a dark color, with little sensation, had closed the throat, and the woman was breathing heavily, had been denied food and water, and would have died if treatment had not been begun within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already stretched so much that it created two openings through which pus will flow.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you will listen to them first and then place yourself in a position where you can see their neck, pull it slightly, and throw it to one side, releasing a large amount of pus. Then, identify the opening from which you understand the other infection is coming, and press on it. Also, hold their tongue, and place the finger in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you will make a large cut, and instead of pus flowing, only a little blood comes out.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, it is the treatment for that woman: soon after, they will start drinking water and eating food. Thus, you should not continue to incise those abscesses frequently; instead, let them heal on their own, and another one may form in place of the previous one, which will prolong its healing process.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should prepare and apply a hot iron to the affected area, and then at once; and afterward, walk about and do not be unclean, for God has given me this remedy.
Capitol .xxxvii.	It appears that the text you provided is a fragment of a medieval medical treatise, but it lacks context and continuity. The sentence "Capitol .xxxvii." suggests that it might be referring to a specific chapter or section in a book, but without the full text or surrounding information, a precise translation is difficult to determine.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of the knee when it is localized.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the knee, and it is localized and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the side, thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	In the treatment of what we have discussed in the previous section, and if your treatment does not agree with this, and indeed, the apposition of cautery has already been applied but it is subtle, then you must incise the one that is round; and if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, of dark red or black color, and it does not give off a bad odor, then you must be cautious with the incision, for there is fear regarding the patient's condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you must immediately remove the malady and press the tongue of it with an instrument that shapes its form, and then return it to its original position, and incise it with one of two instruments known as the 'inscision of two cuts'.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be sure not to insert anything other than what is suitable regarding the natural condition of its addition, for if you insert more of it, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and treat it so that it heals well.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was afraid of the incision, use cunning in the cauterization process to calm their fear, and the method of the cautery on them is simply sharp, and it's important that you place the patient's head on the table, and then press their tongue with the instrument we've mentioned, and take water as we've said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply this gently, and don't make it too thick or too thin, and fill the indentation of the instrument whose shape is like this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The end of the instrument that holds the medicine should be concave like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall from the intrinsic medicine, to prevent any harm to their throat and to protect them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, extract it from the wound, continuing until the space is filled and the medicine is weakened and calmed by its bite.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, submerge the bandage in the medicine, insert the ray into the bandage in a tube from above until the bandage adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, then using a cauterization tool with a bandage soaked in the medicine, absorb it into the wound's circuit, purify that which is in the circuit of its medicine with water and soap, and cure it from the outside with embrocation, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this specific type of treatment is more effective than incision and free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is cured with something more subtle than cautery or incision, and this is done through fumigation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, Arabic cloves, chamomile, brodye, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; the mixture should be boiled; and there should be a hole in the middle of the mixture, over which a convex instrument made of silver or bronze is placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the instrument should be inserted into the patient's throat until the vapor rises to the ulcer, and the ulcer becomes heavily clouded.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process with those spots that have dried, but be careful not to perform this treatment during the onset of abscesses, as you would apply too much pressure to the abscess, and it is important for you to first diagnose the abscess by cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and create a point at the end of it with a hot stone, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, as the point of the hot stone prevents the gas from escaping through the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On extraction of spines and other substances adhering to the skin, and from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may observe substances adhering to the skin or spines from legs or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So then, after you have extracted what is apparent from these [substances], which you observe with your eye, since you press the tongue against the instrument in front of the light, it will allow you to be certain about what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what appears to be hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the strong cause annexed to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it firmly with thread, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spines and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	You can also take an eel and mix it with vinegar, put it in a pot and extract it carefully; or take a fig and carefully cut it open and extract its contents.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes are not forgotten, use a lead instrument in this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	It should be a thick but sharp small point, and at the end of it there is a concave part which you insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's head in their bed, and be careful of handling their neck bone, so that they might catch hold of whatever pushes the bone or the spine, or what the doctor places his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient's condition is more severe, it is better, due to their knowledge of the location of the cause and its attachment, to push it down and apply the instrument with their hand on it, according to the quantity prepared for them, without delay.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter .XXXIX.**
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating pharyngitis as mentioned earlier with medicinal herbs and not surgical intervention, consider the patient's throat under the sun, because you should inspect their tongue with the instrument you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that tiny or subtly moving clot appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concave part of the needle, and do this several times (as long as the blood flow stops and drains from the wound) and apply cold compresses to the wound throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of that water and repeat this process with fresh water every hour or so, as the blood will begin to absorb the water soon.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If we have not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient's throat or use the instruments we have selected for the suffocation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls in the right place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operating in suffocation of that is that you take a cloth in which there are hot coals and the cloth is covered with a cover, in the middle of which is an opening, and the instrument's end is placed in that opening; then apply the subfumigation from above; and have the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not expelled until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the blood will eventually fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, you repeat the subfumigation many times, keep the patient from drinking, and give him salty food and alcohol, and do not let him drink water, and so it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when seen; it is similar to tweezers as well, with one significant difference: it has no curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed on the tongue, and its end resembles a swan's beak, which is smooth with lime, for this reason, when we buy some cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on the consideration of apostemes and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemes are special marks, of various kinds, according to the recollection of their memory, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their piercing and sectioning by two methods: one is for the specific type of apostemas themselves; and for what we understand about humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is specifically the locations in which bodily accidents occur, where the apostema accident in the head is different from the apostema accident in the foot; and the apostema in the fleshy part of the body is different from the apostema in the joint; and each one of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some wounds are such that they must not be probed, but rather allow the healing of the tissues in those areas.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other wounds are such that they must be probed when they cross over joints, and do not heal according to their size, as with wounds that are near joints, when a wound is close to a joint, the condition of it prolongs until you find something in the course of the flow [of blood], and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is a wound near a principal member, and if you delay perforating it while it has not yet matured, it will affect the principal member; or it is near the anus, so do not perforate when it is not mature; and do not pierce it cruely, without completing digestion, but rather that which is near the anus, so as not to allow the pus to escape and extend inside, and create a fistula, or be made in the term of it, which will not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But know that you must know the time for piercing the wound, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that it is cured when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in the redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the sore's head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And furthermore, know how to recognize the drainage location beneath the sore, and also any subsequent draining that occurs as a result of the treatment of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The drainage should always be through the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the tendons, nerves' cords, or arteries; and finally, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use drainage according to the affected member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to wait until the drainage has been confirmed according to its progress, as we have said; for if you drain it too soon before the process is complete, you prolong the course of the disease and increase its severity, and harden the walls of the abscess and deepen its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	You may make some incisions in certain places through the thickness of the flesh or body parts according to need, or depending on what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you must make small incisions, and in large abscesses, deep and wide cuts or sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other types of abscesses where it is necessary to empty the cavity and clean it, when done in this way, it acts like bread and is made in such a term as it already was, similarly to what happens in cases of gangrene and bubo.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And regarding those that are incised in a section with three angles; and of those where the incision is made similarly to the shape of a myrtle leaf, as with the abscesses of the elbow joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And regarding those where a round section and a semicircular section is administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May he who has no such issue as when leeks are superficially attached, be sure to make a shallow or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the attachment (apostema) is thick and has already collected much pus, do not make a deep incision at once; instead, extract a portion of it, then return the apostema to its place within a day, and extract a larger portion next time, gradually increasing the size of the opening until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is very frail, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, because the vital spirit (animal spirit) quickly resolves itself towards the exit of the pus, and often the disease kills them, so you must operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and be sure to clean the wound you make when puncturing these apostemas; consider whether the infection of the apostema is slight or a deep section, then administer the appropriate treatments; and if the apostema is large and the openings from the puncture are wide, apply pressure in several places until they close together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the tendon or ligament is severed in the abscess, then you should close it tightly with strong thread or cloth, just as when you bind wounds or cuts, keeping them moist; and apply heat to it on the third day, and treat and cure it with poultices until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If bleeding occurs during your operation, then administer clean water and vinegar, adding a cloth to it, and place that over the area of the bleeding, applying pressure as needed.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then you should administer regimens and remedies, and apply powders recommended at various locations of this our work and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter, and the abscess is in a location with many nerves, then you should apply poultices in vinegar and oil, and place them over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the parts are fleshy, then cover that you place powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until it becomes dry, as we have said, and then make sure you loosen the crust and clean it and apply what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apostemas universally, more so according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned regarding each type of apostema and its particular way of treatment.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the section on the treatment of apostemas that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck, there are small apostemas, which are of various types with layers that are characteristic of their nature; and each type has its own distinctive qualities.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from their veins come drops, and those contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture similar to dew, and resemble them; and those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, for the incision of those does not cause angry swelling.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in cutting those is that you expect those to be cut with an instrument of the form that you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then you cut those according to length by cutting through the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line from B to G. Once the moisture is evacuated, you remove that which contains that moisture, and do not leave anything from that, for if any cause returns, it will be seen again.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then dip a cotton ball in Egyptian vinegar, if present, or in water and salt; fill the affected area with this and leave it until the next day, as it corrodes everything that breaks through that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the application of Egyptian vinegar to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin break; cure the wound with vinegar until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess due to fat nodes, then incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	make a cut in the shape of a cross, and open it between the two lips of the section, then remove that part entirely, and use your virtue to extract the tunic containing it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If it causes you any discomfort, then do what I have told you at first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And it seems to be done in the case of an abscess by cutting and curing as we have told you; the incision over the abscessed area is lighter because it is of little severity and has little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are these abscesses which are in the head on some men and women of old age, drying up the abscess as it were with a hard, sharp, white stone that cannot be crushed, and if anyone were to touch it, he would be infected by it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, not like these, also appearing on the heads of children and requiring the removal of hair roots, but the incision for all of them is a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the piercing of those in the lower part because it should be away from the health issue in the deeper parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then apply remedies that are appropriate for that which is suitable for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	**Chapter XLII**
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section regarding scrofula that occurs in the collar area.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These knots often occur in the collar, armpits, and angles (or sides), but sometimes they can appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those that occur in the collar, these are knots that are generated among themselves, and all scrofula of these has its own thin covering, just as with the nodes and bumps on the head, similarly when we have treated them.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are knots; some are hard like stones, others contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, when you perceive a good disposition in the touch, of which the color is manifestly similar to that of a bruise, and it is painful at all points, not attached to any nerve, vein, or tendon, and not swollen, understand that you should incise it along the dry superficial line from its origin on the skin (G) to its termination beyond the body (B), and scrape it entirely, extending the edges of the bruise as far as necessary, either with a single cut or multiple cuts, as required, just as we have said regarding the apothems of the head, and extract that part little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And take greater care that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful that the knife is not too sharp, or does not fit in your hand for incision, or causes unease to the patient, and you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or tendon, it would hinder your operation, and then you would have to resort to drugs such as vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, and open up the abscess, and leave it until the acute phase of the apothems has passed and the abscess is softened and begins to putrefy.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until the aid is complete.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate the aforementioned indicated spots to see if there is any cause among the other small ulcers; hence, incise and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large ulcer, you must be careful not to incise that ulcer from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	First, be sure that the aforementioned thread is tightly folded and then gently pull it out without applying excessive force.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with warm Egyptian ointment that you have already applied, and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut into that ulcer completely, you will see that you must close the two edges of the wound and apply poultices as soon as possible to prevent any excess exudation.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If it happens that there is excessive exudation due to the severity of the ulcer, you must understand how to incise the base of it, drain it, and then administer a suture and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial incision at the place where you see the formation of pus, and apply perforation to what is beneath the body's surface, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the incision, using an agent like vinegar and similar substances to corrode what is damaged by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then you must care for it with a generative flesh-healing agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pill (or soft tissue) around the abscess, make an incision.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to make this section in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who does that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	One should be careful in men who have calcification, ensuring that the extraction of the abscess is avoided, for by doing so, all the veins and major structures of the malady are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the malady is not in the tooth, be careful to avoid the section of the abscess to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to treat this, we incise the epilhot between three circles of the epilhot rings, or four with a small section according to the distance between two circles for quantity, making the cut in the bone, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the channels of blood are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, he should extend the thread of the ligature onto the glandular node, and then open the ligature until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if they are affected by any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then he should make incisions in the bone as we have recommended; and it signifies regarding the section of the channel for the inflammation which is situated here, as if it were from something that is corrupt and by the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is passed in which piercing is feared, add two lips from the edge of the wound, and with that single one is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And we have recited the entire discourse that we have compiled, its essence is that some of these doctors have already incised the bowels of the patient, and the illness has spread to death, and the air of life has been cut off, and others are about to incise the epiglot so that the illness may breathe in the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, the wound should remain open until the malignancy of the illness is consumed; and the malignancy lasts for three days. And therefore, at that time, you should command the wound to be thus treated, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a blade and cuts into the throat of the patient and makes an incision in a part of the lung, and I was called to treat it, and I stopped the bleeding as if it were the cry of the dying, and uncovered the infection and located the abscess which had originated from the infection.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you confessed that you had not cut any veins or guided the flow of blood, and the air from the infection was escaping, and you treated it with fire until it was completely healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not scold the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after a few days, return for the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epilot.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs in the gullet outside, it is called a hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called a hernia of the gullet, is a large abscess according to the body's color and it appears more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners: either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural, it is not engendered to heal.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to fat nodules, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a diagnosis with certainty except for the patient who seeks help.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then you examine it and investigate it with your hands, if you find it similar to a thick knot, not suspended from any vein, then cut into it as you would a node, and extract what causes the pain in the flesh and bursae; otherwise, carefully scrutinize its entire being and treat the area with care until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section regarding the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the various types of nodes, there are many species, and I have already described all their kinds in detail.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important that I explain the difference between a node and an excrescence with careful consideration.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that an excrescence is a hot, feverish condition with violent pain, until the inflammation of excess is calmed; and it is putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	There is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts as a lion in the heart that is in the blood.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cease and is made likewise with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, whether they are fat or contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as you have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of no (a condition), you must expel it and inquire about the beginning of the storm that is called intromes, according to how its form comes in the chapter that is most appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the manner of investigating abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this storm and entrome that into the place that is most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your threads about that little by little until you know that this storm has already penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finalize your hand according to the size of the wound, extract the foreign body, and examine what has remained in the track of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current humidity is forgotten, of any color, then you insert a knife into the superficial section as I have said in the other wounds.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity from the track of the foreign body, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a knife without forming a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, lift it up with the pincers, carefully remove all threads from every part, and check the skin or sack, if possible, over that area, and extract the foreign body from its root.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it ruptures during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should make several attempts at this, and then extract it carefully until it does not rupture for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it does not rupture for any reason, whether little or much, the knot returns according to the best method.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that the rupture is from a small part, then complete the problem with some corrosive powders sharp and strong, strengthen the problem, and place a cautery over the one that will be the abscess, and treat the other with the other cure until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of it and treat that with this that has embedded itself.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If a pulsating vein is against it, or not pulsating, then you cut and press the place of the trigging heat that is vitriol and leave that straits for two days or three until the plague subsides and the swelling of the sanc ceases; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, one of which is larger, and another is middle-sized, and another is smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and have sharp edges, in order to insert the instrument into the incisions with precision.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods of those experienced, and they are called herbalists, and one of them is known as a herbalist.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three parts of this spice, one part is very strong, another is milder, and the last is very weak.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the experienced one, the form of him:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the experienced milder one, the form of him:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the experienced very weak one, the form of him:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, these are intended for those with apoplexia, exhaustion, fistulas, and buboes, so that between these conditions, there is something affecting the bones and other causes as well.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And so you make rounds, using large needles sewn with threads, made of iron, or of steel, or of silver, and the best ones are those made of iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these are the experienced ones with black feathers, who recall that through them, fistulas in the cavities of which reflections are seen, are opened, and these reflections are reflected back to their source on those same reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, and others medium-length, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the tightness of the cavity.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced black feather:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the medium-experienced black feather:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the experienced one seeks lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the incisions are of special interest, as they are made from simple curves, and there are three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And regarding the depth of their incisions, there are also three types: shallow, medium, and deep.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And these incisions have two curves as well, with three types of depth.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curves as well, with three types of depth.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple large incision:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a simple ungual (finger or toe) fracture:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a simple ungual (finger or toe) fracture, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a complex ungual (finger or toe) fracture:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a complex ungual (finger or toe) fracture, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a minimally displaced ungual (finger or toe) fracture, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A complex ungual fracture with two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A moderate ungual fracture with two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A minimally displaced ungual fracture with two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a great hook has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a smaller hook has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a very small hook has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels which are used to cut and incise nodules and abscesses, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those to whom this is done have sharp cuts, while other extremities are not sharp but cut in such a way that it is done with freshness in the removal of nodes, avoiding incision of veins or nerves, and for these it heals the disease and brings about tranquil rest a little due to the adjustment which finds the excorination of the ulcer.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of arrows, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large arrow:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium arrow:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small arrow:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and look like a ray in which alcohol is also made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the outer side of the joint that the pointed instrument is hidden and follows the flow inside and outside, as you wish, so too with the others.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the instruments, which are hidden among these times during the piercing of the apertures and do not affect the patients, are of three sizes: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the vents through which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; the forms of the plug:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of thin, round, smooth metal, and are very small.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these are the various types of vents, large and small and medium, so that by means of them the flow of blood can be stopped at the right speed, as needed, and when it is not necessary for treatment in the first instance.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Yet, do not use those to cut or ablate the san in every part of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as on the wounds of the legs and thighs, and on the wounds of the arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, similar to their appearance in moist flesh wounds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And in some cases, these instruments, small like scissors, are used to cut according to this form; the san is abscinded when it is made by phlebotomy, or the incision of a vein or arteryle.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times, they are cut in circles according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the breasts of certain men are inflamed due to lying down during sleep and they become swollen, and similarly the breasts of women also become inflamed and stay that way.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to treat this, they should incise those parts in the lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise the entire roughness, and fill the wound with incarnate medication, and adjust both lips of the wound with stitching, and cure whatever is inside so that it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to separate and becomes softened due to its magnitude, as is often the case with women, then it should be cut into two parts, resembling a crescent moon, of which each one contains the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And then excise the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about sutures and powders for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not perform the incision correctly due to the patient's restlessness and the flow of pus, then fill the infected area with a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the hard tissue, and then treat the area that is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that form under the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that form under the skin due to scrofula, a hard condition, contain a pus that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And for those that contain fluid, they should be incised at the lunar section as per this figure: from the line marked 'G' to the line marked 'B'. Once all the pus has been drained from the abscess, you should close it with a bandage and inspect it again the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the bandage and treat it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If there is an abscess of lymphatic nodes and scrofula, then you should drain it as we have said in the section about scrofula generally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the infection has spread so that gangrene sets in, then apply a cautery to it as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX** (49) - though without the specific content, this heading suggests a continuation of the medical treatise.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	From the section about abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks through the skin and the vein beneath is injured, then abscesses often occur due to the inflammation and infection caused by either an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is caused by an arrow, it is a deep wound in the body; and you can tell that an abscess is formed if there is any hissing felt within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through veins is returned to the manifest of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If this incision on this apostema (suppurating wound) is incorrect, especially in places where the armpits (axilla), angles (angle of the body, perhaps referring to the knee or elbow), and collarbone are involved, and it is large, then it is very important that its treatment with iron (perhaps a metal used for cauterization) be avoided, and if it is on the extremities or head, it should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Concerning him who suffers from the pain caused by the arrows of the bow, cut a longitudinal section in the thigh; then open the section with scissors and release the arrow from the quiver, and remove the clothing so that it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place a needle on it and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten (or remove) the arrow with a string at two places—which causes you to extract from both arrows that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then apply pressure to the area between the two ligaments, spreading them apart until the whole bone is exposed and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments heal; and take care to clean it with suitable poultices until it is cured.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess caused by the rupture of a vein, you must hold your hand over it as much as possible near the abscess with your thumb, and then insert the needle into the place where you have held your hand, and penetrate it; and keep pulling on that thread in two parts until you extract the foreign body from both sides, and then tie off the abscess with a suitable ligament according to what I have said regarding the ligament of grapes from both sides at the two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you are afraid of pulling out the thread, insert a second needle into the whole abscess after making the first incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Nearby dry the ulcer in its middle location until, when this is done, you incise the excess of the wound, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice on it that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and apply the treatment that is done for such things until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	On the surface of the ulcer that occurs due to nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus occur ulcers in the rear and in the veins, and ulcers seem to occur on the nerves when they are struck or caused by excessive labor, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the treatment is applied in the areas of the aids or the foot, or in any place where the joints are damaged.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a grave ulcer, similar in appearance to the other body, and its greatest dispositions are from their own and when it is tightly held with violence, pain in it causes a sensation of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an ulcer added to the surface of the body, and for this reason, it is left open, and it is painful throughout and does not spread forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it does not cover that it be invaded by iron, because their powerful contractions will prevent it.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One can make the incision for those on the head or forehead with a knife.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the ulcer is small, one can use scissors and cut out that part of the skin.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, you suspend it with a bandage, remove that, and then close it with a plaster; treat the wound with sutures and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	It appears that you have provided only the initial letter 'C' and the word 'Capitol', without any context or additional text for translation. To provide an accurate response, I would need the complete sentence or phrase related to 'Capitol'. If you have more text, please share it so I can assist you further.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs from the wound that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Even some people are moved by sight in the abdomens of these individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal-like due to similarity to fungi, of which the roots are subtle and the heads of those are large; and the lips of these are turned inward, and it is from these that a request is made, and it is of these that a great praise is given.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in their belly were two parts that served similar functions, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were everted and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise those and then tighten the one on the foot with a thickness of 18 parts and the other with a thickness of 6 parts.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the illness is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of fine size; then you cut them with a broad spatula, and they should be cauterized over an open fire, for you must drive out the hot blood, and if it bleeds, cauterize that part.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and trembles, beware of sudden cutting with a knife; instead, take a recent fresh plaster, tighten it on that limb in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been incised and falls off by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or trembling in its incision, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you incise the main part of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until the plague is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to attempt to cut what is of a dark color, with little sensation and regular movement, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us recall some further remedies for this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure for hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons; either from fissures in the abdominal wall, from which the intestine or hernia protrudes, or from a sac that flows from a vein or artery as described above, or from excess gas accumulated within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to abdominal wall fissures and the protruding sac, then the color of the hernia is similar to that of the body; it is very painful, and appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the exit of the intestine, consider the situation of that mass we have described, with greater diversity, and when you press it, saying that it is obstructed, then return; for it is very hot in its place, and a great effort is required for the bath to enter and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, you will feel a warmth and not obstruction when pressing with your hand, nor is it constrained or pierced.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these symptoms will show an abscess appearing black and declining in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick, and hard, and its size depends on the amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind, then the touch of it is hot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or vein, or from gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger as taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias by arteria and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must instruct the patient to take a deep breath and remain extended; then make several attempts around the entire navel, and command them to lie with their back between your hands over their abdomen, and encircle the area with a wide spatula around the navel where you have felt the attempt; and extend the boundaries of the hernia above and below using hooks or tape in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you should break the wall of the hernia over the ligament and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; if you have tightened or held it by the ligament, then extract it gently and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have found the fabric, then take some oil; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your practice or vein, then go around that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the circuit you made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will cause penetration; and then tighten the abscess in four directions over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the area to heal until the flesh has extended and fallen on its own; or cut away that portion when it has softened and separated, and then treat that with something that cleanses the infections until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then cover as we have said and remove the pus or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have discussed, in our division, the types of cracks and how treatment is approached using medicine, avoiding curettage where it can lead to ulceration. We have also spoken about the causes of cracks and precautions in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancient ones said that sometimes cracks can be in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as crack in the breasts or in the thighs and similar areas of the body, especially when they are just beginning and small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and deep, it may not respond to treatment, for I have never seen it heal on its own nor been cured through other means.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is when he is arranged as we have said, you should proceed and leave the patient and purge black cholera several times, then bleed him if a manifest swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for the operation with a preparation in which the incision is made; and be careful with the cut, covering it well for good healing without causing any damage to the roots of the wound.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then let the blood flow, do not interrupt it abruptly, press the areas, and clean the thick blood with your hand or an instrument suitable from among the available tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it seems difficult to make an incision of a thick vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then take care of the other injuries with proper treatment so that they heal.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in detail the types of hydrophobia and their symptoms, as well as the remedies for each type using medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistris or the species of yposarcha, for that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrophobia tympanistre with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the illness has already been weakened in the patient or it is another type of malady, similar to these others like those in the throat or abdomen, be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is great fear about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you examine the disease of an excess of virtue, and it is nothing but hydropic, neither young nor old, then the manner of operating on it is that you raise the malady between your fingers, and apply yours hand to press it from the belly, squeezing out the water at the opening left by the foreskin, and take a spiny spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two long, pointed parts, with a sharp extremity just as with a spatula; however, make it neither too short nor too long, so that in operating on that, it does not enter the cavity, and you can handle it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydrops is from the cavities, for you will see that by sectioning near the navel, about three finger-widths on either side, you will find openings left in the right place over the foreskin.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrops is due to a disease of the vascular system, then your section should be left of the navel by three finger-widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the flesh, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your section is on the side where the malady wishes to go, so that excess fluid does not flow to that place painfully.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then thoroughly pierce the entire chord with your instrument, and insert into that section, and place your hand between the chord and the spine, and extract it; and if it is the size of a fingernail or similar.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the spine until the space is reached that the hand wishes to go to, and it is the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that, and insert an instrument whose form is as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or iron, and in its upper part there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is cut out according to the shape of a plume, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, this will cause the water to flow out of the instrument, therefore evacuating a certain amount at a time; for if you evacuate more than necessary in one go, the patient's condition may worsen due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer from a heart attack that brings them close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should evacuate according to the quantity that the instrument allows, and in accordance with what your understanding of the patient's condition dictates, based on the strength of their pulse and the goodness of their disposition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and catch the water whose cause is due to the string that catches the tract above the head from which it is extracted, and you are advised to pierce it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the use of the instrument on other days if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water from it, and do this for several days in turn, with caution not to break the water seal unless absolutely necessary.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the illness, and extract a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sand, and immerse it in a bath, and wait for a long time under the sun; and apply drying medicines to it until it is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and the intestines, and extract the water as previously described in what I have recounted above.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who have not yet developed urinary control.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some of the children are born from their mother's belly with their head in a peculiar position (either too tight or not in the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to carefully consider the perforation of the child as soon as they are born with a delicate motion according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then, place a fine iron claw in the neck and tie it; do this for three days or seven times.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the child wants to urinate, let them do so; then return them (to their previous position).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area, will not heal this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	As for those whose condition is severe, they should be treated with lead clavicles, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the condition is not in its place, it is said that this causes those who are born with it to have difficulty urinating within parties, until they raise the phlegm with their hand above the parts; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a motley illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the illness is turned over his back, and then extend the head of the phlegm from him with your left hand vigorously, and cut the head of the phlegm at the place of the urethra with a sharp instrument, so that the middle part of it comes out in the proper place as if it were the head of the phlegm, and the discharge falls in its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be wary in your operation to drain the pus, for accidents may occur; stop it from draining the pus, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albater (scar tissue) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corrosion and blackening and adhesions of the prepuce at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Various accidents occur with this albater on the penis, and it becomes prominent with the loss of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant and others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, know that you suspend it with a subtle hook and cut off that which remains; then place your hand over the corner subtilly using Egyptian ointment; and after that, treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a dark color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and its drainage.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must drain the abscess that is inside at the beginning before it consolidates; and once you have treated the external part, be careful not to tear the foreskin when treating the internal part.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And they also occur in the genitals and foreskin, dark and swollen, so you must remove everything that is already discolored and deteriorating or corrupted; and then apply a line of ointment to it made from crushed millet flour mixed with dried roses and cloves.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If it is necessary for blood to flow, then administer cauterization monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Cauterization is beneficial for two purposes, either to stop blood flow or to treat an infected wound.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the foreskin is corroded and completely destroyed, then insert a tube made of lead into the inner part of the foreskin to allow the discharge of the infection.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those with a foreskin, and no circumcision is required), when adhesion forms due to an infection or abscess, then use a blunt spatula to carefully separate them until the adhesive tissue is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all attachment.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them gently, then use a spatula to carefully lift the foreskin from the head of the penis, and this is because when the foreskin is thin, its delicate nature allows it to be easily torn during separation.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then gently separate the prepuce from the head of the penis using a subtle knife, which has already been lubricated with water so that it does not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a compress with astringent properties to ensure that the wound is healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter XVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own doing and done by our own will, and performed specifically on children, it is necessary that we approach this better operation and method with greater care to prevent further harm and contribute to their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not write it in their laws, and only do so because we have acquired this by experience, which is why I have found most of the craftsmen and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and pincers; they use lint and an ungloved cut.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And having tried all these methods and not finding better relief than with scissors, pliers or thread in the operation, remember that when you cut through the skin of the foreskin, which has two layers, the deeper layer (the tunica) remains below, and it is often forced to another incision, causing more pain and danger.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the operation using heat, which is done by cauterization, and is digital, where the surgeon uses a hot iron, does not guarantee the incision at the end of the male member, as it can cause deep damage to the tissue inside.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with heat, if you use too much force, it can deform and spoil your surgical work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in many cases it does not require operation, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	On the preparation that is made with scissors and linen tied with silk, my experience has discovered the goodness, for the scissors are of a proportional incision, so that the sharpness that is above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you apply your hand with both sharp points, make an incision according to a comparison in time; and it makes compression of the silk in the form containing the knot of the whip from all sides, from which no error arises.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you must ensure the child remains mostly still if it is one of those who gets restless, do not do anything but tie the silk to its whip and let it heal within a day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to please him in all ways that he may understand and accept your care.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And it is appropriate to be prepared with all the tools at your disposal and not to cause any fear; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over the foot so that the child does not see them or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it by filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then secure the site marked with a thread using a small piece of second ligament, place your finger on it and point to the location of the ligament left with good tension, and incise between the two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the rectum slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; clean the passage with warm water, then place a cloth soaked in warm oil on it, leave it for another day, and treat the area with care until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps for cleaning, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities are of two kinds; some not quite straight and others straight, so that the shaft of the bone is not bent, and the length of both [bones] is equal to the length of two hand spans.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in purification is that the strong reading escapes the intrinsic code, or part of it, and you must make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So consider that you extend the one from your hand to your finger in front of the place of incision and make an incision according to this equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, take a hook and make an incision with that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and they say that it is swollen there where the scalded ulcer is located, then leave it until the ulcer becomes soft, and carefully remove that, making an incision as you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, for it will not allow itself to be treated.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat the area affected by this plague that solidifies from the powders we have described in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the cord on the right measure and follows the sections of its roots, this will not notice it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to that which we have said should be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an increase in pressure from the kidney or stone, or from relaxation or congestion, and is similar to those we have described regarding treatment methods in the chapter.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if urine is not discharged and retention of it occurs due to pressure, which already exists in the bladder's neck, then understand that the illness is further bent upon its sides.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on someone's back and stretch their abdomen away from their back, extending as much as possible. The illness will tighten its hold on them to that extent.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the bladder's neck is constricted to facilitate the expulsion of urine through the rear passages, so that it can be voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it does not dissolve as mentioned above, then the cause of the illness should be treated with a syringe, which is called "siringua". Its form is like a lion's jaw, thin and long, similar to a palm and a half, with a thin cane at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination through that is to take the urethra folded and tied at the end of a string or wick for good binding; and insert the ends of the urethra into the meatus beyond the foreskin, and cut it with scissors if any cause from the string is superfluous, but insert it forcefully into the catheter and then widen the meatus with a edge and albumen of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply herbs to the wound on the skin, and extract the vesica and the pus with oils mixed, with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the root of the pus; and bend the pus upward at the opening of the wound; and push the catheter from that side; and push it until it reaches the vesica, and that cent to have the wound healed to its cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which there is curvature.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the urethra at the tip, as the urine dries the tissue.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, using a catheter, do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's discomfort relieved.
Capitol .lix.	**Chapter LIX.**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder clisterization with clamps and similar instruments suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When bladder ulcers or abscesses occur, or there is constricted perforation, and you wish to drain water and medicines from it, use an instrument called a clamp, and this is the way to do it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that at the end of it is sealed, completely closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that moment, there are three actions: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there occurs a congestion, in which is that which is urged forward, and according to its quantity, it piles up; when some cause throws off the humidities, they are thrown out, and when these are expelled, something else is thrown to fill the void, as if a clamp were struck where naphtha is ignited in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you wish to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the tip of the clamp into the humor and throw it towards the parts below, for the humor is thrown out into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the clamp into the urethra as we have recommended in the circula; and push the humor towards what you are pushing, for that humor soon reaches the bladder, and the disease increases through it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is cristallized, and that shape is:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or lead, which makes the head look like a small feather, and leave the cane within the ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder and move it, and place in that moisture which you wish to cristallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the cristallizer into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder, stretching the moisture gently until the patient feels that that moisture has completely entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, then take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; drill that circle through its entirety; then insert the thread strongly into those channels, twisting it; and add the cloth to the circle so as to create an enclosure, since you pause in that which you want of the moisture, smells, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie him up with the bandage and make it so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	**Capitol LX**
De extraccio de peyra.	From extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of stone that requires surgical intervention with the hand, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder proper is the one that is located in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they speak of that as an explicit exposition and concise summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones formed in the bladder most often affect children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the illness burns its skin, sometimes causing pain, and it often presents itself; and thus, the cause of these is found in those things.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And healing is easier for children under twelve years old, while it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	The cure for the elderly is more difficult due to what exists between those [parts].
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And concerning him whose stone is larger and whose cure is more difficult, the treatment is contrary to that of one with a smaller stone.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to arrive at the cure for this condition, we must begin by modifying the malady with a knife that extracts all the fissures present in their intestines, as these fissures sometimes prevent the stone's passage during examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then, with the malady taken from their feet and properly positioned, it should be gently encouraged for the stone to descend into the bladder or, if necessary, to move to another location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cut between your hands, prepared, and leave the patient's things as they are, so that the bladder is completely emptied towards the openings left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove all those foreign bodies completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then cut into it at once.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove the stone from below entirely, then apply oil to the small finger of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or an adult, and insert that into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And when the stone is inside, make sure it stays there with the help of your small finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that point into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then apply pressure to that place as I have said, and expel it from the parts outside, from the site where you cut it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the assistant to press the vesicle with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs with his right hand above them, and with his other hand to hold the cord that is left on the legs, from the site where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a knife into the space, following this form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And it cuts into what is between the buttocks and the legs, not in the middle, starting on the left side; and the incision should be on that bone, following the natural direction, and a transverse cut is made, so that the external cut is wide and the internal narrow according to the amount that can be extracted from the stone, without excess, for it understands the importance of the place where the stone resides, and the error can cause its disfunction.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is a stone in the kidney that has angles and margins, making it difficult to urinate due to it.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from there it resembles a gland, round, and has a difficult urination emission.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the one with angles and margins, insert it into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus removed, cover your hands over it or tie it up properly, the extremity of which should be as sharp as a lime, which you tighten over the kidney, without causing it to escape; or insert a subtle tool with a curved extremity between them.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then enlarge the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut off strongly with the vitriol knife.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, you push your hand into the bladder's opening and insert a knife; then you gently press it inside; and seemingly, it breaks into two or more pieces.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is advisable not to cut it into pieces but to ignore it, as this causes two issues for the patient: either it remains there or it leads to the continuous discharge of urine, which is why the affected area is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	You may administer the expulsion of the stone from within, or use a tool with scissors to break it and extract the pieces through the patient's urine.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So, having completed your procedure, you should fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and then bandage it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place your hand on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in warm oil and water, to ensure the heat is carefully released.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then gently turn the patient over onto their back, and do not disturb the dressing for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When the dressing is removed, wash the area with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of aloe vera and myrrh until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the case of this plague, an abscess forms, puncture and drain it, and from that moment on apply similar treatments as if the urine was frozen in the bladder (and this is known as the prohibition of urination), thus inserting what is called the 'tying string' into the plague and extracting that pus, for otherwise it can cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then rinse the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose it to all kinds of things that are helpful for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the stages of healing, be sure to cover and adjust things as you find necessary over the affected area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the deep part of the kidney, and its passage through urine is blocked, treatment should be done to avoid obstruction, for stones treated in this way are often associated with blockage; already having extracted it, it is important to take care, as you should seek a steel needle, whose shape is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	triangular in shape at the tip, sharp, located in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take some fiber and tie it to the kidney around the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the fire, piercing it easily until the tip reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then turn the drill in your hand on that stone little by little, and continue to drill until you have made an opening from the other side; for then the urine will begin to flow.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over what is broken off from the stone outside of the fire, for it is crumbled and opened up by the urine, and the disease is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not appropriate for any reason, then leave a thread attached to the stone, and another thread on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then tie the stone to the fire between two pieces of wood.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then carefully loosen the ligament and clean the infected wound, which is formed in the ulcer.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to use a strong ligature on the kidney, only to prevent its return to the bladder, and another ligature above, because when the stone is loosened from the kidney, the urinary tract returns to its place and the pain subsides.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And this is necessary when you remove the stone from above, that you elevate the urinary tract to its proper position, or it may return to its original state, and the pain will recur as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	In women, stones in the kidneys are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in any of those areas, its treatment is difficult and is prohibited by numerous methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their secrets is that women with strong willpower can overcome it.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you should not find a woman more intelligent than herself; if she reveals her knowledge to a doctor when she is pregnant, or she is from a family of married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you should not find a woman more knowledgeable about this art, especially regarding surgery with her hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision for kidney stones in women is far from the location of the stone, so a skilled surgeon is needed, and there is fear involved.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, you should seek help from a skilled female doctor, who can be hard to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are unable to find such a doctor, seek out a skilled and knowledgeable midwife, or a woman well-versed in the arts of healing for women.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, instruct the present midwife to do everything you command, from examining the patient's condition to determining if the woman is a virgin. Ensure she records her findings regarding the woman's sexual status and carefully handles the examination.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If the midwife finds her useful, she should take notes of her observations and later instruct her to inscribe these findings.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, instruct the midwife to carefully insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the urethra. She should also place her left hand on the bladder, paying close attention to any issues.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, gradually massage that one from the openings of the bladder to the parts left in addition to the strength of its virtue so that it reaches that part at the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert into that position of the cone at the root of the thigh, stop some part from any side and focus on that part, and do not remove the stone from the patient.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the saw over that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the amount, knowing how much stone will be removed from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are as follows: some are small and hard, others are large and sharp, and some are elongated and round, and they have spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many parts there are in it according to what you intend to do regarding that which you wish.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vitriol in a triangle shape and let it act for an hour until the clot is dissolved, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the passage that is narrow, then apply powder over the area and use your hands to gently press and open it, but do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not attempt to extract it, for thus the illness will worsen.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, once the intensity of the wound has decreased after some days and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	**Capitol LXII**
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On section concerning hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia occurs when there is an accumulation of moisture in the white chest cavity, which leaves the genitals of the individual exposed, and it is thus called the chest.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural pouch that prepares itself for the passage of the hou, as if it were another hou; and it is the closure of the genitals between the white chest cavity that we have mentioned, and it is not a true closure.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, so that this material is discharged to them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture does not have any distinct color; for its color may be citron or bloody, or red, or dark and foul-smelling, or clear white, and it is the latter that is most dangerous.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows this addition of water are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have spoken of, then the abscess inclines downward a little along its length, taking on a shape like a bow, and the swelling appears, because the moisture gathers from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the own fat, then the abscess turns round and away from the bone, and so one thinks it is another bone.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the joints of the genitals and the white bone, then suddenly the feeling goes away.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you expect the color of the moisture in the abscess from the touch of which its form is preceded; and according to what is left in the trace of the touch, judge what is within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of the leg pain, it is necessary to command that the patient be put to bed if possible, and make him lie down in a comfortable position.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then, if for any reason the patient needs to lie on their back for a short while, provide them with clean sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the patient's left side, and instruct the helper to follow on their right side, extending their hands from two fingers to the knee of the genitals and to the navel area of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a long, sharp spatula and split the genitals from their midline by inserting it between them.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to the direction of the hair growth, at a distance from the line where you need to cut off the genitals, until you reach the white muscle below.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise him, observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert anything; and your incision, which you excise in a particular manner, should be suspended from the greater and smaller blood vessels, and examine the incision according to the amount possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then, with a wide perforation, pierce the bladder full of water, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then, separate between the two lips of the section with incisions, extend the bladder to its parts above; and do not touch the cords as they are understood by nature, and insert the bladder in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And make incisions on him in their entirety or in parts, especially along their thin edges, for if you do not scrutinize the incision of him carefully, it is certain that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If, during the course of your procedure, you find that the hernia has returned to its original position before completing the incision, then return it inside, and properly adjust both lips of the hernia from the genitals with sutures, and treat it just like any other wound until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the hernia has been corrupted by another illness, then cut the vessels that are above the suspender, extract the hernia, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if two waters are added in separate instances, you will know that both are hernias; then incise the one according to what you have done with the other; and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then wash the wound, and immerse the sections in oil or rose oil; bring out another cloth that you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; place this on top of folded and clean sheets, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then, take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with wool yarn in this manner; fasten the ends with dry twine or wool, and add them to the tightness in the crotch of the breeches, taking one end from the buttocks between the two, and the second at the opening of the thigh, and two other ends on each side over two joints, and all tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting; so you take a thin cut-wound cautery and incise at the root of the hernial ring, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white scar tissue containing the fluid becomes exposed, and then you take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled like Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then, perforate that scar tissue, and ignite it until all moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the limb with cuts, and cut away with cuts, and burn with a delicate, ignited cautery; incise according as you can until you eliminate all; and be careful that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is less dangerous and less likely to cause infection, and better than an amputation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you opposition to apply a post-embolism cautery at the time of amputation or cauterization, or an infection flow, then take care that you cure what is opposing you, as treatment fitting for it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the disease is severe, and there is no hope for a second operation because of its horror, then apply perforation as I have recommended; and it is at this point that you must, based on what we have said about the meanings, certify that this hernia is hydrous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now, let's translate the given sentence line by line:
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it should be a wide opening so that all the water flows through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area, press it tightly, and release it to allow the flow of water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then take care of it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if any contrary condition exists at the time you drain the water, it is not done except where the white panniculi in the orifices of the plague cause difficulty and prevent the outflow of water—in this case, insert a pen or instrument designed to extract water from the hydropic (swelling) parts; or apply a small amount of pressure to the plague.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns and accumulates again after some months or environ those; and when it is accumulated, pierce it in the same manner as before, for thus the illness will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol .lxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On section concerning fleshy hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section concerning this hernia, there is great fear of its becoming perilous to vital functions; for it seems to me that its removal and being saved is the better course.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on that one as well as the spices of the incisions.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the incisions (or 'apostemas') appear in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of these parts, and they are made for several causes: either because of an acute and excessive inflammation that spills over into the genera, or through percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the appearance of the incision (or 'apostema') is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in itself, but a grave (or serious) incision.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And it is very rare that a black, hard ulcer appears, of which there is no pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And in some cases, it is caused by the compression of the arteries or the inflammation of those areas where the pain is already felt, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This can be understood as: "It is known that the inflammation of arteries causes the ulcer to break open when you press on them, and one should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one caused by vein inflammation does not break open due to any cause except compression on those areas.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that in this case, a section is made only on this specific part and not on the other muscles; and this is done by incising the skin of the genius, then opening the compartments of their parts, extracting the white-colored lymph, loosening the suspenders of the vessels, tying them, and incising the suspender that you loosen from all parts of the genius.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the bone is already consolidated in that flesh, then you must extract it and incise that one.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any cause in the joint, or between what is between the bones, then you must dissolve all of that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion, which is behind, then you must incise everything that belongs to it, and extract the bone as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with warm oil and wool; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .LXIV. (46)
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are internal.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an appendicitis wrapped up by some kind of inflammation similar to a lump and softening of the testicles, making it difficult to move and walk for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, one must be wary of what preceded it, for that is where remembrance comes into play.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is important to note that I mentioned operation according to what I did first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you should stop the patient's pain on a raised bed; then pull the suspender of the testicles towards each other; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hands, as they are tested on the scale; and have those other assistants help you, and extend them to their full extent with urgency.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut with a sharp knife, along a longitudinal section, through the vessels while they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from any remaining part, as we have discussed in the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then take a needle with a double thread, and pass it through the first part where the problem occurs, and then the other thread through the last part.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut into the middle part at a right angle following the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul humidity and corruption.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you wish to prevent any further complications, so that vessels, which may cause either pain or bleeding, do not continue to do so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If a wound occurs in all the veins, then you must know if the testicles are extracted or if they are compressed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the veins, and become atrophied, or compressed in such a way that they do not function properly.
Capitol .lxv.	It appears that the text you've provided is missing or incomplete, as there is no clear content to translate from the given context. The capital or title "Capitol .lxv." alone does not contain any comprehensible information for translation. Please provide a complete sentence or section from the medical treatise for accurate translation.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	# On the Care of Intestinal Hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending over the stomach from the openings of the intestinal organs, allowing the intestines to protrude through the gap.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either of the abdominal wall or of the hernia itself, and it occurs due to various causes: blows, sharp objects, sudden movements, the lifting of heavy objects, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly, and it forms a bulge on one side within the abdomen as the abdominal cavity is pressed upon by the hernia.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it being due to a tear in the abdominal wall is that it causes a sudden and intense pain; it appears as a distinct bulge on either side of the abdomen near the affected area, due to the protrusion of the intestines outside the abdominal cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this condition is called intestinal hernial protrusion.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is caused by wind, and in others, it occurs due to a rupture in the intestinal cavity, where it becomes trapped, causing significant harm to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be cautious, as it is important to avoid the wrong ingredients and their potential harmful effects.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The surgical procedure for this condition involves reducing the hernia back into its cavity using the patient's hand, placing it on top of their chest between your fingers, and then raising their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then, tighten the cord that secures the testes, cutting it entirely through; and fix it in two folds of the incised section as needed to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the sectioning is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from that part without causing harm.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then carefully extract those bodies that are left in the scrotum of the testicles, as long as the white hard mass of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into that which is between the testicle, where the white mass is, which is left in the scrotum of the testis, and between the second mass, and free that adhesion which is behind the testis.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then with your hand, grip the scrotum of the testicles outside, and extend the white mass on your left hand, and raise the testis to the part of the section; and command the assistant to spread the testis out on it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek out the threads that say there is no cause for the intestine enclosed in the hard white ciphe (scrotum).
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause of the intestinal condition, then press down on the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a thick, strong thread of eight parts, and insert it through the last (testicular) cord, which is cut; and cut off the ends of the thread that emerge from within, making four threads, and then tie them to some object in the shape of a cross; and attach the scrotum, of which we spoke as having the testicular cord left, firmly from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly together, so that none of the vessels through which these flow can introduce any cause for infection to occur from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply another bandage a second time according to the first bandage, at most three days apart; then remove this second bandage from the hip, which holds the testicles, in terms of its size, and cut off all remaining bulges, and keep it away from the wound.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make an incision in the scrotum area, from which blood and pus will flow, as we have recommended in what we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and place a poultice; use the bandage we recommended (and sometimes white wax is cauterized on the incision due to fear of pus flow, as these have been seen to cause issues), and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is prolonged, then apply a water compress and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said above.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cure for the plague with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Chapter LXVI**
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventous Hernia**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates a successful treatment for it other than by force.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first approach is to do as we have recommended for hernia, which is to reduce the openings with a section close to the affected area; and then dry the middle part around the abscess with something that will promote healing, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that is suffered in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, dislocations in the ankles break and protrude as we have said, so they must be attended to immediately.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not hesitate to consider any cause of hernias at birth; and if there is one, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, the fissure in the bone must be adjusted while the hernia is still within the bone; this happens due to the extension of the bone in the ankle as we have said, which causes it to become stretched, and consequently softened, and the area becomes inflamed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is done by cautery in this way, as it is preceded by the narration of the condition.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the disease lies on both sides between the thighs, and then the site of the rupture of the prominent apertures is dried with a section according to the extent, depending on the quantity of three parts.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white rope that is below the spine until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the stick and place it over the prominent location of the rope, and press that against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then make the two prominent locations on the end of the rope's stick fit together and adjust the suture from one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then carefully extract the end of the intestine, without piercing its entire thickness, nor extending it or causing any other damage; this is something you must know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then carefully tend to the treatment of wounds, and when you cut away the pus, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is solidified; for the tissue is contracted and the protrusion of rupture is not yet healed.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A cautery is better at this site, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testicles becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues between them; for this requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure them that they make the malady lie according to their own will, and raise all the edges that are softened over the natural edge; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning, because of the superfluity of the softened edge, make three stitches or four and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then take care for the healing of the other plagues within that they are saned and the dregs fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of this book, I will remind you of it; and its remembrance is only necessary in two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it by a doctor who knows the cure for such cases, he may understand; and the other way is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young, just as with horses, donkeys, pigs, and similar creatures.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by compression or by a sectional incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by compression, the surgical procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and flexible, allowing them to hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not appear after the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration by sectional incision, take the animal and with your left hand press the cord of the testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then attach the suspensory and cut into each testicle with a sectioning tool.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut away that pus which has been extracted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those of the head, but the subtle head which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by ligature, for strong ligature leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast does not desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one where there appears a space in the scrotum where ovaries should be, in which case it resembles a woman's anatomy with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, it is a flow of urine that comes from the back of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females, there is a peculiarity: the clitoris of a woman resembles two testes of a man, slightly smaller at the external opening, just like the prepuce of a man has two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is because you must understand how to tighten those meats within that escape the emission of that (body fluid), and then cure it with a remedy for other illnesses as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second type of men, for whom urine comes from the back of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is applicable to them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the legs is closely related to natural causes, as it is affected and becomes noticeable through observation; in some cases, it is aggravated in certain women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and may occur during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So then, if you have an excess of swelling in your legs with your hand or thumb, and it is deep, probe.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop probing until the point of the probe is reached, so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that as part of the cure for the plague, until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	When flesh is born that has no place in the horror of the mother's womb, it becomes hard and detached from the inside outwardly, according to appearance (and for this reason they sometimes call it "tailborn malady"); therefore we must cut it thus as we cut a limb, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Cure for Arterial Disease**
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arterial disease is when the container (conch) of the female's body is not properly closed or a rupture occurs.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded it, or caused by flesh not properly adjusted, or a subtle and thickening buildup.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made in the region of the heart, or in the ribs, or in the upper part of the lungs, or in the lower part of them, and it prevents from coughing and sneezing and childbirth, and strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the meter, if the swelling is visible, it is treated immediately; but if it is not visible, you should seek it with your hands or by feeling the region.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the swelling is subtle and affects both lips, then you should bite and break it off.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers indicate the depth of both at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, her limbs extended, and then force both lips open until that subtle swelling is broken and the obstruction is removed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it over the area, and keep applying heat to the site so that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the mass is large and hard, then cut into it with a sharp knife or a chisel of myrtle wood.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is due to fluid accumulation, then suspend it using a hook and cut into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and other herbs, adjusted to an albumen of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide platinum cannula so that the infection does not solidify prematurely.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days, and administer water from the source.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation while it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural origin of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the extremities should not be opposed with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail and red swelling that occurs in the rectum of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of small veins, rather than from those of larger ones; and as they become old, they dry up and form scabs.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And already have I spoken of the divisions of those species and the signs of those species, and to say thus of those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron is not effective.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the body, over which sensation is felt, are those that receive treatment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And take care that you put the woman in a warm bath, and extend her limbs with forks or rough cloth, and cut those with razor blades.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those parts the flows of sacred ointment from a powdery mortar, thus as with cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision in decoction with scissors and drain away the puss and bruises and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, apply the paste to the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess has drained, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages to the affected area and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and dip it in vinegar or in the juice of nettle or in the juice of willow, mix with wine and apply to the area; and then treat the place with a poultice until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Maybe the text reads: "May the patient, whose condition is of severe concern, understand that you must insert this according to what appears to you from the aforementioned.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which must be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you're referring to a specific chapter or section, "Capitol .lxxiv." Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to provide a direct translation. However, in Latin numeration, ".lxxiv" translates to 74. This could be the caption or heading of a chapter in a medieval medical treatise.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye's socket during an accident.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various special cases of abscesses occurring in the eye, including inflammation, abscesses, ulcers, inflammation of the eyelids, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other types of abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these maladies and their types, the signs of those conditions, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And take heed what I say in this treatise about gangrene, which you see in the worst cases when it comes to healing, and if you want to know how the operation is performed on it with fire.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So then consider whether the pain of gangrene in its beginning is sharp, with percussion and fever, and sometimes that swelling, and if heat is felt over it, do not immediately perforate it, but cure it by something that aids maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then know that you must cease the flow of blood with a clamp that has two clamps; recline him on his back and align his feet at the lower part beneath the belly, and spread his thighs, and rest his arms below his shoulders, and tie some to this appropriately.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened, the form of which will appear in those cases that are to be done properly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to use this instrument, hold the point of the scalpel against the skin of the woman's thigh, and whatever part of the instrument enters into the woman should not be larger than the point of the scalpel and it should ease the pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the point of the scalpel, then you should apply poultices over the skin of the thigh to prevent any further entry of instruments into the thigh.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should ensure that the blade of the instrument is facing downwards and that the assistant holds the instrument, opening the orifice of the woman while rotating the blade until it is completely open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the incision is made and it bleeds, you should immediately clean the area with a hot cloth to stop the bleeding.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanity is evacuated, you must place a cloth soaked in warm or cold oil on the affected area to reduce inflammation; and apply pressure in the section near the anus at the base of the colon.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then remove the cloth from the anus and place a clean, moistened cloth with aloe on the penis.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And the cure is completed within two days, applying whatever is appropriate to it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then treated with water enriched with extracts from nettle or long-rooted aristology, and finally, the application is renewed.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the infection is deep in the anus, you must abstain from treating it with fire, but rather focus on the treatment we have mentioned above.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos should be treated when they present in an unnatural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A midwife must recognize the onset of labor by observing signs from nature, for when she sees a woman straining at the contractions and desires to breathe deeply, and is distracted by the pressure of the child on her body, and hastens the delivery of the infant, then know that this birth is according to nature's figure. The head of the child comes out first, or perhaps it is suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe those signs, know that her belly is compressed so that the infant gently descends as it shifts from its head position, and the second stage begins, and she is freed from those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Healing those who are different in this part is neither natural nor commendable, for when the disease is concentrated on their feet and their body is positioned with their head below their feet and one hand at their foot or their head above it, or their head and hand at their stomach, they twist greatly upon their spine and resemble figures that are not to be praised.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all such matters, and guard against mistakes and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the signs of these, and what cunning is in them so that it may be understood by them and stand upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is positioned over their head due to natural difficulty, and that causes great pain in the woman, and often her virtue is already weakened, then she should be helped, or what women have, and vaporizes the pain of him with fennel seed and moist odors.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then carefully insert the instrument between their cracked and split skin and make a second cut or, rather, use your finger to ensure that what is inside becomes moist.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the baby descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a mixture of poppy seeds and fenugreek, crushed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the woman, take away the heat, which should be removed and made to cough; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the baby is expelled shortly afterwards.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both feet of the baby have not been expelled at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a cushion and raise her feet up, and then carefully place the cushion on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the pain persists and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to the mother's hand with a cloth and remove it carefully, for that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the positioning of the embryo over the feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the embryo is on the feet, then you must gently push them up, and gradually turn the small body, and slowly take one of its legs and stretch those little ones out.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If it is situated within the bones, then command the patient to exhale, and make them cough up the condition, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if what we have recommended is forgotten, then return the dislocation little by little until it takes on its second natural form, for that will be when the lighter aspect is forgotten.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do what we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and grind them well in a mortar for a good percussion, and return the cone of the femur, the pus from the bottom of the patient's belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make that incision in distilled water, until the hypoconidia are reached.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the wounds have healed and become clean, then make him inhale smoke from myrrh and rest him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the smoke treatment for an hour, then make him lie down on a bed, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take away from him, and press the lower part of his belly with a lighter compression, for the dislocation will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the condition of their teeth and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition presents itself in this manner, then you must skillfully insert your hands little by little; and place the woman with her back arched over her belly, her legs hanging down, and her weight supported on her side, and adjust her hands accordingly.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the patient's belly little by little, and extract from it whatever remains in their legs from the scabs until it is prepared for the pus to flow out.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the condition is not resolved, then take the patient's legs and move them vigorously, and press gently on the hip joints little by little until the discharge can leave from within.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and adjust the condition little by little, and command the woman to exhale until the discharge is completely expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The state of the patient's condition hangs suspiciously from one of his limbs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use ingenuity in reducing the patient's hand, but if you cannot do that, raise the woman and try that way.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If the above method fails, lie the patient down, and by violently compressing their body parts, attempt to reduce them. Near the affected area, apply medications that you have prepared or recommended before.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If labor has begun, then perform the procedure on the head, and carefully study the reduction of the hand, enveloping the fetus in its natural form and commanding the woman to breathe deeply until the baby is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The fetus is positioned with its limbs extended, the fascia around it expanding to twice its normal size.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should have her hand on the child and gradually turn it this way and that, so as to facilitate the delivery.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is heated and soaked, then apply to the hernia what we have recommended of oil and bandages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the patient to move their legs little by little, and when you have done this, make a cut here, and command them to lean on their right side, then command them to change position, and have them sneeze in this position.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see signs of distress in the mother according to this method, consider and then insert the second instrument into your hand, within which it will be emptied of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the object is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you will cut through that with an instrument, so that it is not retained and causes death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then, with your hand, push the object apart until it stops in the space that it covers, and instruct the woman to take some breaths, and then slowly extract it, if God wishes.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that twin births can be seen, and sometimes three or four, which is strange and difficult to explain; however, their causes may lie in nature, not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And regarding those cases, even if they are multiplied, a second time, and separated by calculation, distinguish those that enter the ligament in each person's navel, and some births may be lost as if it were a single fetus, and some births may remain as if they were uncountable, due to their fragility.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver through natural means and you reach the point we mentioned about non-natural figures, then treat them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and makes it subtle, and delays it, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares them with the means leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder that it forms in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have verified that a woman who has aborted does not get pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes great worry due to the measurement of the wise doctors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this should be in the science of midwifery that she pays close attention to that young woman who seems similar to this, and therefore should be very careful about it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Regarding the extraction of what is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead matter as we have discussed in the division of medicine and it has not been expelled externally, and you are forced to use manual operations, then consider whether the woman is of sound health and free from any conditions that might lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now consider that the woman should be placed face-up on her back, and her head inclined down, and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the practitioner should hold both parts or be placed on the woman's back to prevent her body from moving during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the patient with scents of humid oils and mucilage of aloe and fenugreek and the seeds thereof.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife places her hand with those oils and mucilage, gently enters her hand into the mother, and carefully seeks the place where the cuts are made in the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this regard: then consider if the child is ready to be delivered onto its head, and carefully place the cuts in the heels of him, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or on his palate, or leave the beard, or on the fork of him, or in the places proper to the ribs, or leave the hip bones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the delivery is over the feet of him, then in the pubic area, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And take care that he holds the finger with his right hand, and positions the curve of it in the place between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his thumb with ease, holding the finger in one of those places we have mentioned, until he reaches the source of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, in the same position as the first, ensuring an equal attraction, and do not extend it excessively according to its natural state.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it is advisable to do this at all times, so that the removal of it is facilitated as much as possible, just as is done when pulling a tooth for its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them, so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it remains stuck, then the midwife should apply some of her remedies with oil and insert those skillfully and turn those stuck parts over into the liquid.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the location of the stone is forgotten, then incisions should be made in that place where the stone is, until it is removed entirely.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is twisted and cannot be reduced by compression, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and once everything is removed, cut through the joint of the hand or the knee.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the stone is large, or it becomes entangled during extraction, or it's at the top of contracted fluid, then insert between the sharp edges and split the head and extract the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat", which resembles other instruments described in the chapters close to this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And seemingly, the making of this is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that it inserts that ligament, or takes up that swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is solidified and constricted, then its fork must be cut open so that the moisture in the foot can be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not go against common sense, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the discharge from the abdomen is an apoplexy or it is water-like, then you must perforate that place through which the moisture in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the procedure is on their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction of it towards the mother's opening should also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly and foot are compressed, then you must remove that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and foot until what is inside comes out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are held still and the head is turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked, then insert the hand into the opening of the womb, seek for that cap (possibly a fetus), and draw it out with those digits into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one, or two fingers, and pull it out.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to make it worse; instead, carefully administer an infusion of wet, greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices, and continue the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the issue is on their side, try to do an incision if possible; and administer what we have said regarding the living flesh.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the leg and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause within the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, administer what we have said about the treatment for the wounds that may occur from the procedure.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding from an opening, rinse with sterile water and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and then once more she became pregnant, and another time she gave birth to dead offspring.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It has happened that, after a long time, an abscess opens up in his skin; and fire erupts within it, and he begins to shiver with cold.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been frequently called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should stop treating them from certain causes with strong attraction, and extract one bone from them, and after a few days, another bone; and be amazed that there is no bone left in their belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you will pursue the disease, extracting from them many bones, the woman existing in their proper arrangements, and already have been living in such a manner for a long time, curing them with a small amount of strength.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be afraid that it seems strange, for in this there is knowledge and help to the patient, which the doctor with his art uses his hand for the sake of healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a strapper in which the edges are aligned, whose alignment has two sharp points at the two ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this strap should be made to be neither too tight nor too loose, and it can be made of leather or linen thread.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each linen should be such that two threads meet at a point, and the margin of both sides of each thread is one finger's breadth, and in the middle part of two threads, there are two fastenings of this same thread, whose length is less than a palm by a little, and the width of each thread is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open to receive those which you turn to the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that subtle and light pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wood or bone, according to the appearance of tongs.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the extremity of it, two additional pieces can also be added, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each is approximately two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother, you lay the woman on her side over the legs, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand over the instrument with the cutting pliers according to the amount you want from the appreciation of the mother's mouth, as long as the meter indicates that you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vertigo which the ancients speak of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing which drives the process:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as contained in the great head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is constructed like forceps with teeth at the end, so when it is used, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, like forceps again, with teeth also like a saw tooth with which it cuts and holds.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of healing little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Method of unwinding without a thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Method of unwinding without two thorns:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps with teeth that close in which the head of the child is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A spatula with two extremities, by which the head is separated.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments should be exercised, and when the number of their parts is increased, or they are prepared in a more complex way, it becomes lighter for the practitioner to use them and more useful for people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second (tooth, part, etc.)
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in this condition, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they exhale, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, take a blade and make a hole in the cover, then place those herbs that open the mouth of the mother: calament, rudas, anaet, camomille, scicados, aromatic wood cassia, and holy hay.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs, or some of them, should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and keep it there until the vapor returns to the concave part of the mother's body.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one is expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment does not work and is not sufficient, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of elder, and then insert that hand into the patient's anus and search for the second one. Once found, take it out slowly, bit by bit, according to what has been recommended so that the mother does not feel a strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Once it is determined that the pain is in the right or left side, facilitate the process accordingly.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and does not adhere.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with various herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then be careful not to do anything in the course of abstraction, but nonetheless know that what has been extracted from him and goes into the mother's mouth lies in the matter of the woman, and therefore anoint it with a mixture of herbs and four drugs; for this will soon putrefy, dissolve, and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is observed that there is a high fever in the head and stomach, which causes pain to the patient, then know that fumigates and appropriate remedies should be administered.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used fumigation with fennel and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menstruation and post-childbirth bleeding:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to examine or feel.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine tip of the instrument should be placed within the ring and the wider end over the flame, and the subtle smoke extraction should be done over the arms of the flame.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke extraction is consumed, then repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants have this, and the navels of babies who have not yet been pierced are delicate and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp tool, and be careful not to touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and tend to that wound until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of obstruction, apply pressure on the trap for several days, and stop when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that oppression in the anus occurs due to a lump or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with water and lead, as we have said regarding treatment and plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that tend to form.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that form in the perineum contain a large amount of pus, are tender and swollen, often protruding from near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a mass.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is ancient and corrupt from damp white pus or subtle decay, sometimes these are the result of such fistulas penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating are guided by the fluid that has accumulated from them through the opening and due to congestion; and sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in passing, and often there is strong pain from these worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from these fistulas, some are found in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And where the fistula is guided and does not penetrate, you should insert a thin thread into the anus, and try to gently pull or push on the fistula when it is not painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that area, insert a thin rod or horsehair into it until you feel the tension or hair on the exact spot.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any tension at all or there is no cause for evacuation such as parasites or flatulence, as we have said, you should know that it is non-penetrable, and then proceed to treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrable into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from that area and prohibition of any further discharge until that location is securely cured by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrable into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that tension pervades here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the circuit of the blood; and it will cause pustules forever; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it cured by ointments.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those is hard work and patience of skilled doctors who are firm in their art.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron is hoped for as per what you have been advised and what has already been proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the disease moves between the patient's thighs over their hips, raising their legs inside, with their thighs inclined towards their belly, and then it inserts a probe of lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, into the place where you know the probe will enter.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert the pointed instrument directly into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already made its way through and discovered to penetrate, or if you feel something between the chest wall and that flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say this is a cure for certain men's pain.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which one hopes for recovery in them, make subtle cauterizations according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned above, and insert that hot brand into the fistula until it reaches around the inside; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those flesh parts that are adjusted and fistulated, which seem like a quill of goose down, have healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then wrap those with calgues (bandages) around until all those parts that are adjusted become healed, and treat those wounds with medicinal herbs that generate and consolidate healing, and if it is healed, it is good; otherwise, in no time will it be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the inside, as it is said that which is in the anus, and between that and the attempt that is somewhat of flesh or fiber, then dry the fistula so that it reaches the surface of the anus; then let the anus dry from the beginning of the fistula, and when the attempt dries too, and indeed the fistula is dried until the end of the attempt, and by the attempt it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then carefully clean those infected flesh that are assembled like a tube of pen ink and not ruptured from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If there is a flow of pus from the wound between you and your operation when you inspect those flesh, then take care that it is healthy and use a clean instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, for fire cautery adjusts both habits: it adjusts those flesh attached and cuts off the pus by drying out humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then carefully tend to those wrapped in cold or caused by a tight bandage within the affected area, and take care of the infection with hot applications to hard, infected flesh causing pain and solidifying.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these remedies involve cleansing and extraction; when the pain is relieved, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you detect a tumor that is clearly visible and between you and it there is no significant thickness of tissue or flesh, and it is likely to penetrate, then it is not surgery on it but rather through a trusted and hopeful way.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: first, by cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, by drying it out to return it to its cavity so that you can insert whatever is necessary and provide the cure; do not use excessive incision because it may not drain the abscess containing it, and it might cause more harm than good, following the patient's wishes; and take care of it as we have said, since it will be a strong treatment. Or, second, elongate that membrane and drain the pus that has dried within it near the anus, as we have mentioned, or using a probe or another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats that are in the section where you can pass through by incision and cauterization; and strive to restore the entire wound through incision, and if the orifice above it does not heal and the fistula remains open at the anus, it will be lighter for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is in the thigh near the surface of the body and along the margin of the buttock, then take the pointed end to perforate, which is thus with a needle prepared according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that fistula wrapped in gauze or surrounding it; then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates along the margin of the buttock very deeply, then extract the fistula from there as you have inserted the probe into the anus; remove the end of the fistula and join both ends, and leave it thus for one or two days, and when you again insert the fistula into the flesh, open it until those parts of the flesh that are between the two ends of the fistula are opened, which fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with heat or pressure, because it is not appropriate for you to do this so as not to cause further injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharply curved and the other part is not sharp, so as not to puncture what is unnecessary, thus carefully.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways: either they are between the anus and seem like coal, or those are with the fat of inflammation.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the heat flows from them at that time and is one, and it is numerous, and it comes out of the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are only from the anus, according to a few moistures, of which citrus water or a little hot blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is within the anus is that you command the patient to sit and press until the anus is open and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and gently press with your fingers or what you have at hand, and close the anus by pressing its edges.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the presses are not held in those because of their moisture and softening, then take a coarse cloth or a napkin or woolen thread, and extract them with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powdered substances over them after the incision, so that they adhere to the place instead of cauterization, or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to pressure, then crisp the malady with a small incision, wash it with water that is in the cavity and prevents the hernia from coming out more gently when the malady is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is trivial, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with a unguent, and cut them off, and then attend to them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who makes the incision should administer the suture according to this manner: take a thread wrapped in wool and with an needle, remove the hemorrhoids from their positions above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread on the side below the needle, stretch the hemorrhoid by strong tension, tie the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do it thoroughly, leaving none untouched, so that the excess of cold blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a warm compress soaked in olive oil or wax over the affected area, and press it against the pain while instructing the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that compress and, when the pain subsides, apply either ointment or other remedies until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas can occur as a result of drying out (exsecation) or narrowing (costriction) of the affected area.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to those remedies, you must clean the punctures made with a spatula or your finger, ensuring they remain moist and draining the pus that forms, which prevents scarring; and then treat them until they are healed and consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those with a strong reason, as the first enters that you see most inflamed and wounded; then take care of those within so they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The cure for hernia is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a bulge in the body resembling a bone head, and it occurs throughout the body but mainly in the groin area and sides, and you should address it due to the pain it causes.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so it is incised where it is in the circumference of the hernia, and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its place; and then care should be taken of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A verruca is a small, rough, round ulcer raised on the surface of the body, often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or open it again with a sharp tool within the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they are eradicated both inwardly and outwardly with the instrument that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mosca (or fly) is a small, wrinkled or fistulated protuberance on the skin's surface, often accompanied by itching, and when its bite is felt, it resembles that of a mosquito, and it can be found anywhere on the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle of goose or falcon feather, make it strong, and press it onto the swelling until it contains the circle of the needle; then turn your hand with the needle inside until you cut into what is in the circle of the swelling, and press it into the flesh, and eradicate the swelling from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you prefer, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this shape:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The opening at the top of the needle should be subtle, not sharp (non-perforating), wrapped around itself so that when it is pressed upon the swelling, its appearance is improved and the revolution of that [needle] is facilitated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as described above in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes heat is applied with silver or bronze or melted earth, and sometimes with small or large instruments according to those used for treating small children, and of those whose backs are bent or painful, the heat from those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few heat applications:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the bag's tube above which the sac is tied should be wide according to this manner; and at its distinction, where the sac is tied, thus it should be with times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), made with caution; and on one side of the length of it there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be filled with medicines made from the bladder of a beast or from sheep's skin, and its size be about a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with many such things as are turned; and if the space between the parts is too narrow, use a larger one.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those parts strong vinegar of crushed walnut, or surround them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed on it, tighten it at the base of the patient's genitalia between two distinct points with a firm constriction, and then bind each part: The quality of binding that part is to fill the bag with medicine that is warm according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too strong or too weak.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then place the patient on their back, raise their legs up and rest them on another body or a pillow; and apply the tip of the cautery with oil or with egg album or with mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the anus with ease, and then have the assistant remove the bag and squeeze it twice, and gently press until everything in the genitalia is evacuated; and then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, hold him until he can; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that applying heat to the pain of intestinal solutions and vomiting helps him, then you apply cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or ulcers in the anus that cause pain, then use a gentle and subtle cautery, of which children should be taught.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already stated in the division of the cure for plague what is suitable for each case, and you have thus given the cure for those with great pain and according to the perfection of medicine.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place on which the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are likewise due to the piercing of stone, or the opening of space or wound, or striking with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on sudden movements.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Plagues that are in the parts of the body may be thus: as a plague which seizes upon the head, or the nape, or the foot, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is often recommended for the cure of certain plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate concerning other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the compounded ones will come at the commencement of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider this: if it is due to tension or something similar, and the patient has already bitten the tongue deeply enough and it is a severe headache and you fear the development of post-herpetic apoplexy, then you should cauterize and perform a flebotomy on the head as soon as possible; extract blood from the vein according to the quantity of virtue in it, unless there is any other cause prohibiting flebotomy, especially if the headache that has arisen from the illness is rare.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And flebotomy is the opposite of the affected area; and pay attention to the patient's diet, avoiding excessive food and drink.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If, however, any cause prohibits drawing blood, then reduce the diet and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the illness, if it develops into post-herpetic apoplexy, apply a hot compress soaked in olive oil or wine that is slightly heated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the location of the abscess, then apply pressure to the sore, if it is recent, and its pus and the air have not changed the powder that I will describe shortly, then make a small incision.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has changed that, then apply various remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the abscess is large or it is due to an opening in the space and of similar size, and the edges of the wound are not suitable for sewing, then adjust them with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of their wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the abscess has already been discovered through the skin and muscle, and it is not a retention but a small suspended one, then make an incision and, near the wound, treat the abscess with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in that area, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are harsh: vegetables and fruits of a similar type and size to them, until they are healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrid flesh in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, you cut out all the rotten parts and throw them away, and then take care of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues are caused by an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not lanced by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should lance it with a knife or tie it off; and if cauterization is necessary to prevent further discharge after the pus has been drained, do so.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is slight; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take one part olive oil from broken sesame seeds, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts non-extinct ash; mix all together finely and fill the plague with it, and constrict it well with a good bandage so that it adheres to that which caused it, and coagulate the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it over the pulleys and leave it there, and do not loosen it while it is in that position, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it is treated solely with cautery, when there is no sign of inflammation or gangrene.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is performed on large tumors when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and they are fresh with their own inflammation, the air of which has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then one does not understand the position of this powder, but instead cure them with what we have said: tighten over these inflamed spots with a mixture of egg and honey, or tighten over the pores of the ordered flour with water and honey until they are cured; and then apply the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in the bone due to a blow, and it is small, then you extract it with your hands.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And now, I will tell the cure for fractures of the skull that are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the head.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the head, it is not different in treatment, except for the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the head are cut, then if it is nerves, the treatment should not be aggressive but rather to avoid harm to them as they cause violent spasms. Thus, as they inflame and squeeze, one should use things like vitriol and similar substances on them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity leads to the brain, which is the source of all members' distress.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If it is treated with lighter medicines, then wash it with water twice, sometimes with rosewater or other waters, and apply heat after washing with water, and the other remedies afterward, following this method, and moisten it with humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is severe, then apply a suture, or tighten the edges of the wound, and afterward, treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or there is pus in it, then open it again at the most sensitive point with a perforation.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already incised and there is blood flow, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if that is necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already incised the spinal joints entirely and saved the neck veins, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures on the spine's channel and do not touch that area; equalize it and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it gently without excessive stretch, and leave it for a few days; also care for the area with poultices in which there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the disease has already taken hold in the bone, then probe it and if there are fragments of decay within, remove as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for healing until the plague consumes it, and separate it, alleviating its presence from the body.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the plague has caused an ulcer, then treat it with water from the source of its origin in accordance with its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the ailments of the chest or similar, when pain occurs between the shoulders and is felt in space or a cut or lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or a cut and the patient feels the depth of pain, consider more carefully if the illness has an airborne quality when the patient's condition worsens; then know that the illness is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the illness is recent, then you should place on it from the first hour a poultice, and do not press hard so that the pus does not get trapped in the depths of the wound and return to the body, causing more harm; instead, place an attractive ointment on it and wipe it off twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should apply to the wound a clean cloth soaked in vinegar so that it draws out what comes from the moisture; and make the patient rest on the wound so that whatever is in it can flow properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the disease has passed three days or more without causing muscle spasms, tremors of the heart, or stiffness in the joints, and other good dispositions of the body appear, then you will know that the disease is cured; and then treat those that remain with appropriate remedies until they are healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the disease is prolonged and still no fistula has formed, then you will know that it is already cured; so treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the disease is due to a cut or wound in the flesh or bone, and it is superficial on the foot or back, then treat it as mentioned above: with stitching if it's a large wound, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the disease has already affected the bone, and it is necessary to cut into the flesh to extract the bones if they are separated, then you should squeeze the plague and extract the bones.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the plague does not spread, as their removal is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other members, the treatment from the beginning is what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	On abdominal plague.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great, some openings are made in the intestine or its nerves, so that their intrusion is made and their suture is done with greater vehemence and subtlety.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I know that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their intrusion into their place immediately, as it opens and thickens so that the entry into it becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus the best disruption is done by lying down, for in that position it is not difficult to return the intestine to its place, as it is difficult in both of the aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common to all other body wounds.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures communicate with other wounds, but they are still more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you the exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it is said that when the wound is small and there is no cause for the intestine to protrude, making it difficult to return it to its place, this is in one of two ways: either due to the inadequacy of the disruption as we have mentioned, or when the intestine has become inflamed from the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this occurs, you should know that you need to soak that which you immerse in a sponge or cloth dampened in warm water, or take water with lemon, fennel, and spices, and apply it to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, it is effective where there is stiffness, and water alone is not enough to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you perceive that the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the hernia with water containing aloe and marshmallow, for these will alleviate the pain and discomfort caused by it.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the pain and discomfort persist despite this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small instrument, which is used to incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it involves no cutting, and there is no need to immediately stop eating or fasting.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the sharp blade, and another part not sharp, and the tip is subtle, but it's not the subtlety of a spatula, rather it's slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the disease has progressed and the hernia has protruded, it should be returned to its reduction according to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible over that, as it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is extensive, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must keep the head lower than the feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must pause your intention and consideration at that point so that the part with the disease is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in both great and minor ailments.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in minor ailments, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, holding it entirely in your hand, adjusting the edges of the wound, and gradually uncovering from one point to another until any cause for the suture becomes apparent.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the wound's width; then lay it at the edge of the wound from the little finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid putting any strain on both ends of the thread, but rather let the thread penetrate from the other side; when you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the cloth, you have made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases, connect both parts together; add both edges of the wound and close it properly; take the thickness of your finger and insert another needle at that point, then attach the thread to it just as with the first needle; do not stop doing this for the needles until you have completely closed all the gaps of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thickness, for the thin ones cut the flesh slightly; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, hence they must be both thin and thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be forgotten that the needle should be placed in both ends of the wound at once, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the injury heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures should not be prolonged, so that the injury is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then cut the ends of the needles off so that they do not lead to further harm as the patient sleeps; and place your hand over the stitches, using clean, soft poultices from head to toe, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the injury is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitches are most conveniently done with needles in any way suitable for small wounds, as one needle or two or around those can be used for the stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is thus: and it is that you administer a stitch to all four extremities, from the coccyx and two extremities of the leg, at once, with an needle in which thread is tightly wrapped in both subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that entry point, starting from where it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, making the stitch like a drape with which the drapes are tightly bound.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, pause to measure the thickness of the said thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture knows men well.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And I have used this suture to treat a man who had an infection in his belly that was caused by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major plague covering an area of about two palms around the hernia in the middle of the abdomen; and so I reduced the swelling that had been present for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in about 15 days or so, and I treated it, and he recovered completely; and afterwards I visited him for many years, and he returned to his usual state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; but by a miracle, because you did not treat him with any ointment or medicine, yet you applied heat to the wound twice a day and washed it daily with honey water, it healed completely.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of suture mentioned according to the account of words.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And begin with the suture of the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to the rule and length of the body, leave the tip of the thread in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the other end into the other end of the wound from outside to inside.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made it penetrate, make it penetrate again in the other end of that wound from outside to inside; and leave the tip of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make a penetration with that penetration which you cause to penetrate into the body at the end of the sight which is in the part of him within so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin with this procedure on the side of the body, taking care of that extremity which is at the other end from the sight, and take out the needle from the thread with which it penetrated, then return it to that thread and place the extremity of the sight on the opposite side of this needle; and take out from the thread what belongs to him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once, then another time, and keep doing it until you have cooked everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you cook with a stitch of skin which I sew the fur, so that you cook the body once from the side of the end of the needle, and then do that other time until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of suture, which is most commonly used in Gaul, and this one is of great importance both for speech and for action, is that you sew according to the second layer, which some physicians sew, adding to it all necessary parts to make it suitable by nature; and apply the end of one part of it to the other end of the opposite part, and do so according to your discretion.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take the needle at the end of the mirror and insert it into the opening on the inside, passing through both ends of the hernia; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside, through both ends of the hernia.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those stitches around and make some of the opening on the inside penetrate through to the outside in both ends of the mirror, other than the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which one remembers beforehand.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they may say to you, the stomach suture is corrected with two needles; so you must insert a thread into some of them, and begin to introduce the needle from this one, making it penetrate within the other side according to the suture of those which join the flesh alternately.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there becomes more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The game of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which is the cause that when you obtain the recent plague in front of its sore that the air alters it, and return the intestine and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that fleshly powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply to that place hot compresses which are present with you until they cause hard pain and break the boils, and become healed and cured; and then treat this wound just as other wounds are treated until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have any medicines on hand, then apply to it immediately, as it begins to feel hot, cold compresses, and change them every two hours during the day, just as you were taught, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medications due to improper preparations when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you are afraid that the wound will communicate with other injuries in vital parts, then cover it with a linen cloth soaked in oil of high quality or in melted fat, and place it on the surface of the areas located between the angles and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in the intestines, as often happens, then apply a cold compress of black stinging nettle tea, especially if the infection has spread to the intestine and there is an exit penetrating the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that a hernia involving larger organs will heal more slowly than one affecting smaller organs.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And the hernia known as "inguinal" is difficult to heal because it does not receive cure from any plague; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, the magnitude of them, the subtlety of that body part, and its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If it is that you process the plague with a bandage and manage to stop it recently, reduce it according to your method of treatment for hernias generally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been some time and the skin has turned red or black, then you should tighten the bandage over the affected area to prevent pus, as there are veins and arteries beneath the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut through this other material, hold the two ends of the thread pendant from the opening left by the ulcer, so that by pulling on the thread, the attraction of it is alleviated and the expulsion of the thread from the ulcer's breach occurs.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of hernias when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture in the intestine occurs and is small, it is possible for some people to have it restored, so consider this: you may find someone who had been plagued by an intestinal ulcer, pierced with a lance, and was an old ulcer that had formed a fistula, and from it came management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you should pursue the cure for it, even if it was not confirmed in the healing of it; instead, follow that which brings heat to the area and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having examined the place and confirmed that it is solidified, understand the affliction you suffer from this malicious event in your stomach; do not attempt to treat any other evil that may arise by consuming or drinking, and then immerse yourself in a bath and exercise according to its dictates.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones say that when the plague strikes in the intestine, and it is small, then you should tie it according to this manner: take a fork of large teeth; adjust both lips of the plague and place one fork of those that open the mouth over both lips of the plague; therefore, when it grasps those and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it sticks and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another fork near the first, and do not stop making forks one after another according to the amount of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return it and thus remove the plague; break off those attached heads within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia is narrow and delicate, made from the hernia of an animal, finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernial fibers, completely stripped, and attach the end of them to a thread, wrap it, and insert that thread into the hernia, and reduce it in its rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is severe and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it is not merely reduction, but subtlety, and there is no complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the cure of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every wound and abscess, when it ages and becomes old, turns into a ulcer, and is not healed and can last forever; in any part of the body, it is generally called a fistula, and we call that our ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to truth, is a cut that is bloody, hard, white and without pain, and it has the same curvature as the one caused by external pain; for this reason it is called acute pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people's bodies that moisture accumulates, which can cause swelling; and in many cases, the humidity is absorbed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is excessive, and sometimes it is scanty, and sometimes it is thick, and sometimes it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already stated it in the previous section when describing the plagues: if any ulcer that does not heal or is not in a naked part of the body is caused by one of these factors: either due to a deficiency of blood in the body; or malice within it; or because, between it and the skin, there is hard, prohibitive flesh preventing the natural healing process; or it is excessively moist; or because that ulcer itself becomes putrid, and the material passing through it is of poor quality; or the medicine for its cure is inappropriate; or corruption spreads in the region and becomes a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, as is the case with Saragossa, where the digestion of illnesses is difficult, and the healing of abscesses takes a long time because of its natural properties; or if there is bone involved, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It has already been shown all those causes, their signs, and the cure for them with medicines in detail.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so, I will now explain the cure for a fistula that is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skin, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints, or any of the complex articulations of the hand and foot; and those are the ones that give rise near the primary member and of similar nature.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that are according to this manner, is one of the most difficult maladies to cure and does not receive treatment; occupation with it requires effort and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is a fistula whose depth does not allow access to these places that are mentioned, and you wait and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a forceps, and if the fistula is as indicated, inquire about it with him.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a delicate probe, for the weight of his body's fluid is lifted and the twist must be corrected to heal the deformity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula presents an extremely horrible odor, it is not appropriate to attempt anything about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you cleanse that one must also be applied to the other orifices and their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you must inquire extremely carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concave of the fistula is distant or close, or it is a fistula with only horrible odor which is entirely in the power of your strength, and from which you question the malady, and the discovery of pain depends on your compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs of the accidents and causes to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will then see the cure according to your knowledge: for you now consider whether it is a fistula close by or in a distant place, near a joint or nerve, artery or vein, or in one of the places that you know and call.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you examine the fistula according to the description given of its location, remove what is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and cure what has arisen in the opening of the flesh or from parts like them, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude, then you must make an incision into it as far as possible, and clean it of all corrupt flesh; and then apply some moistened compresses with sharp medicines, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have understood with your hand.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And for this purpose, some times it is useful to use an acute medicine that corrodes everything that is hardened in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore those that ignite healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify this, then you examine it and dry it according to what we have recommended; however, do not allow any cause from veins or nerves or from a major member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then you clean it until the corruption is completely removed; and then care for it with medicine until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the disease does not respond as expected to treatment, then you will know that you have not achieved complete eradication of the corruption; and then you examine it again, carefully doing the reason for it and purifying it with the last remaining strength, and appropriately restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and so to you, on that point, there is no cure but to lay it open.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small and within your reach, then you can use delicate forceps to extract it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, leaving no cause for concern due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of discomfort arises from moisture, and in their dissection there is no fear or error, then incise those inflammations or flesh if they are here, and dislocate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to separate the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the area where the pain occurs, and let it rest there until the pain subsides, ensuring that the inflammation does not penetrate between the bones, muscles, and ligaments, and be careful that the incision you have made in your operation is not closed.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	In the meantime, if you are afraid, apply a hot compress or oil to the affected area, or immerse it in Egyptian honey or any other green ointment, for when the inflammations subside and the bones can be separated from their attachment, this attraction will be alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as the bones of the leg or thigh or similar, and what is corrupted from it only affects the skin, then cut it off as close to the affected area as possible, until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part that is corrupted is extensive, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to completely cut out that part in the location where the corruption has taken place, and once it is healed, treat it.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to hold it in place and serve as an assistant to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the cause of the pain is a burst blood vessel inside the body until the material reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of apoplexy or a great apoplexy, without any external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore, the time should be extended for treatment due to the mistake of the doctors as the apoplexy becomes severe, and it will attract mobile materials, and its cure is slowed down until the leg is fistulated, and you make incisions in it that cause great pain and erosion and humidity in the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after this, many physicians around these two years, and they do not focus on the knowledge but on the art, since you are called to it.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the patient's legs and the matter that was flowing from them through these terrible pains in their great body; and already the condition of that man was entirely stable, and the colour of him was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you insert the probe into one of these openings and succeed in penetrating the bone with the probe.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then you carefully examine all the openings and find those that lead to their origin from every part of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut and incise over one of these openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted, very putrid, and deteriorated; and already a part of the leg was rotten where I had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you will secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I thought that it was not the bone but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I will pause the restoration of the plague with restorative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I will repeat and expose the bone secondarily according to the initial discovery, and seek any ongoing corruption within the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will secure what appears to me as that corruption, and then I will make holes in it to effect its cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And so I exposed it again, and did not cut the bone in one piece but made holes in it, effecting its restoration, and yet it was not restored until I cut around a palm of it, extracted what was within its marrow, and then restored it with medicine; it became slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no further repetition is required in the operation of removing it except for the arrangement of its fragility and the lack of patience to endure it and the fear of death, as it falls into a coma at all times due to excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is achieved through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its disposition within the body is good, and its virtue returns; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and no contrary movement or damage occurs during walking or any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if a bone protrudes outside the body, you must act as follows: take a linen bandage and wrap it tightly around the end of that protruding bone, asking someone to extend it; then place a thicker bandage over the first one, close it against the flesh that is exposed, and extend the tip to pull the flesh away from the gap you wish to close so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a wedge or table under the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not forbidden to cut through the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be careful with the sawing on the corrupt place little by little, because if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear in the sense of feeling, then force the cutting another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, sometimes it is a continuous break from one side to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you should cut through all parts of the flesh; and place a wedge under, and saw the first break where the corruption has entered until the cutting of the other break continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupt joint, and tighten the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but requires skill.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and open that, and remove that according to some disposition possible for you, and with careful skill, so that neither veins nor nerves are harmed.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which ones are the bone cutters and the saws for cutting these bones must be very according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and the thickness of those, and their subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity; so that it is necessary that for every kind of operation, you prepare the suitable instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you stand in need; when you have great study and long experience of the manners of this art, and are a witness to the methods of various maladies, then you will already have for yourself what is suitable for it among instruments for all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will learn, at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your training, in accordance with the prohibition that you will experience in dealing with others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the form of a stellate key, and its points are in the shape of spikes.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to apply this unless the heads of the joints are irritated when they are corrupt or the opening of the mouth is excessively wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The form of the larger razors compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	The form of the smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	The form of the broad razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved less and its blade sharp, and the bones of its handle firmly fitted.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the scalpel with a concave edge:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another very thin scalpel:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another scalpel with an extremely curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small scalpel resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the saw-like instrument that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller saw instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting instrument; this one resembling a ray, with a serrated tip, and used in various places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray which is suitable for the treatment of one who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular with an acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and in appearance resembles all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremity and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you have administered for that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption worsens to the point where it threatens the life or health of the member, then you must incise that member within which the malady is localized, so that the evil may be removed from causing death or severe harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black as soon as fire has burned it, or if you see the darkness approaching that wound to that part which has been affected and takes over the whole body, then make an incision at once from that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources such as from a scorpion's sting or a viper or a nettle and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is on the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the whole arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you change your mind, you cut the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption or a different environment affects the joint, then that is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause related to it in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And it similarly does for the foot when corruption appears in one part, then you cut into it at a joint among the bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then cut through the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter within the bone, then cut the leg at the joint of the bone.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then there is no cure for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament in the area where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the place; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament onto it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without splitting them wide enough until all the flesh is uncovered; and then it is either cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it should be covered with clean cloth from all parts to prevent contact with the affected area, and bring the patient's injury to a halt, adjusted and carefully watched.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the site carefully, or apply some powders to constrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member with ligaments in a way that is appropriate, and treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to dig into the skin of a man at his foot, this instrument that you and I have recommended, which occurred to him due to an accumulation of blackness on his foot resembling the burn of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption, which was first acquired in the inner part of his foot, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And therefore, that man prepares himself for this disease by seeking relief from the pain and burning of his member with the urgency of its condition, and he incises into the foot at the joint, and it heals with fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that disease condition occurred at the indicated part of the foot.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And therefore, it prevails over me, and thus I have perforated to let out that superfluity with the aid of what rests on my hand from the array of medicines, then purifying the body's part; and the superfluity is not ejected, and it begins to move towards another internal part where it started in the foot.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor attempts to cut into the patient's hand, and you do not want to do this hoping for the resolution of that superfluity, rather, you must hold fast to the incision of the patient's dead hand, for the virtue of the disease was in its decay.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and forced me to prepare and cut off the hand of that man, and he is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this account is not presented merely to describe this illness but to provide aid regarding what causes it and what its significance is, so that it may be understood and treated accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of wounds and the quality of enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscess occurs in some fatty parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as it collects pus, then it ruptures and perforates, and the pus spills out from it, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains intact, and it does not progress to final corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or connective tissue, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged and corruption spreads throughout a member, it is then called a fistula and should not be incised.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that whole cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtile and made with a knife, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will not adhere and that that corruption does not continue due to its last effect, and if the cord has passed through the face, then treat it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the condition of the sinuses, and if they are great, and the arm that they affect has a foul odor, then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and spices, mixed together in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the body, and leave the medicine in him for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that foul matter; do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain relieved.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, enema with ashes of vine is used when this medicine is not available to you; take the ashes of vines, place them in water, and then use that to cleanse the sinus until you feel that it has been relieved.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine and ashes water, then cleanse the sinus with a mixture of honey, water, and third part of vinegar; also cleanse it with a mix of vinegar, honey, and water, for the honey cleanses and washes, while vinegar helps adhere the sinus, especially when vinegar has excessed in sharpness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which nourishes the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you take a mixture of dyphynic (a medicinal substance) and dissolve that oily crust and stop the bleeding; or you cleanse that part with some medicines and apply others which have already been described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow in which the catheter of the enema cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge them with a small iron, and apply heat wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices seem to be wide, then you close them with stitches and leave enough quantity so that between the enemas there is addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of the patient from which the arm emerges is raised above its parts, dry it in the lowest place on them so that the arm runs between them, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of their sinus, flesh will be generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the depth of the bone in the lowest place as you wish, then pierce what you have prepared for the member so that the arm can run from it lightly according to your intention and without any cause for the constriction of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied over the sinus according to what you wish to extend, also wrapping them in cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a quantity that it covers all the sinus; then, with scissors, cut in the right place at the opening of the sinus slightly wider than the opening itself; and wrap other cloths around the wound according to the size of the opening, placing them at a distance from the opening of the sinus so as to prevent the arm from coming out and not to strain the cloth excessively for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is above the opening of the sinus, which keeps on throbbing at all times so that what is trapped in it comes out through the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you will know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is infected.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material that has accumulated over the sinus opening has become adherent, or a strong adhesion has formed, then on the third day, remove the bandage, dislodge the adhesion, and when you have removed the affliction, change the dressing for a new one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If from the sinus a thin, subtle space has been opened, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, for healing to itself belongs, for some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others have the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a bruised arm has been left for several days and the swelling does not subside, know that the bruising will not adhere; and if the adhesion of the bruise is prolonged, adjust your treatment with dry medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their nature and virtue, they should be dried as if with a specific ointment, when there is an excess of moisture from additional protection.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last remedy that is used, which should be applied, is to take a specific ointment and dissolve it in warm oil, and spread it over the affected area, and then wrap it with cloth, and apply that to it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to be the same procedure when there is no arm injury; apply specific ointment mixed with honey, which should be thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, and crush them all and sprinkle over honey while it's on fire, and wrap it in cloth and press that onto the affected area; and apply the honey you have prepared, which you noticed becoming thick, and sprinkle that in cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And in some cases, they administer to him long-drawn-out and finely chopped lilies of the sky (which are lilies of the sky), and erthwort flour and centaury, and use these simples either pure or adjusted, grind them and sift them and sprinkle them over honey which you have mixed; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew prolongs and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the tendon of it, and it has already affected the bones or other hard members or their bindings; then you treat it with fisticulative treatment, as is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of pannarics (skin lesions), oozing nails, adding cuts to the finger, and making incisions.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Pannarics are an apostema (skin infection) that begins with the nail of the finger or toe, and it spreads to other parts, and as it prolongs, its treatment becomes more difficult; sometimes it is cauterized to prevent further spread, or it becomes corrupted, releasing pus that corrodes the root of the nail, causing it to rot completely. It then reaches the bone within, emitting an unpleasant odor, and the end of the finger becomes infected, and its color turns dull.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have dealt with that as we have said in the previous section and do not confirm your treatment, then cut off with a knife all the excess fluid that is formed in the joint and apply a hot cautery to it, for cauterization brings relief to this condition.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is strong and the joint is healthy, but the inflammation's additions already penetrate the tissues inside, and they begin to prick and hurt it, then stop and make a subtle cut at the angle of the pricking joint, and push that aside, cut the meat easily, and apply over it the remedies of corrosives medicines as long as there remains something from the meat; and take care to treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if corruption has already penetrated the bone, then cut into the bone and extract it, for never is a bone healed that is corrupted within it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe corrosion and destruction in the area, then incise it with one of the knives according to your memory of its location, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If it is necessary to perform percussion or incision on the swollen area due to intense pain, then begin by lancing the malformation, and carefully dry the nail using a sharp spatula, cutting across its top, but ensure the section does not penetrate the surrounding flesh, as this could cause further intense pain and lead to the growth of excess tissue at the site; treat that area with something that provides relief from the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this adjustment, which is naturally present in the bodies of many people, is entirely flesh in some, entirely bone in others, or entirely nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is the nature of some nuts in the area.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born into this world with certain knowledge does not suffer much, but he who is born into the joints with great strength suffers more.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And regarding those who are born fleshly, the cut is shallow, for you must insert the blade into their flesh at a slight angle.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with the problem in the joint's root, treatment is difficult; therefore, be wary of amputation from it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	For he who is born with knowledge in these parts, you must cut the flesh at the beginning around the bone with a round incision, and then close it with a suitable saw to ensure it heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that occurs between the joints due to repeated movements or by nature in a person who has not experienced it before, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar, therefore, you must remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets some cloth soaked in warm oil so that the joints do not harden too quickly, and separate them with a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if it seems that the consolidation occurs in some particular place, like the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the knowledge of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are thick, twisted veins filled with melancholic excess fluid that occur in various parts of the body, most commonly appearing on the legs, particularly on the calves, and to a greater extent in those who lead an inactive lifestyle or perform heavy labor or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	So, it is clear that you should administer a purge to the body from black choler at times with a strong expulsion, and also draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their pain is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and the black san (foul matter) be removed, and the other manner is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made in this way: first, the leg is soaked with hot water until the thick foul matter (san) is dissolved, which is sticky to the thigh, then firmly hold the patient's thigh at the superior part of the wound using a bandage, and incise the vein in one, two, or three places with an ample incision, and raise the black san (foul matter) from below the thigh, towards the wound, until the desired quantity is removed, as much as necessary to alleviate the disease.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then tie it up tightly, and order the patient to abstain from hot foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are swollen and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their legs should be in this manner: you who support the leg of the patient, if it is stiff with pain, immerse it in water and soak the leg with lukewarm water until it becomes flexible and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised with intense activity, immerse it in water as soon as possible while the member is still warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then, carefully open the vein at the right place, either along its length or near its end, and apply pressure to stop the flow of blood, or cut it off entirely if necessary.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then, open the vein with incisions and remove the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you must observe its condition to see if the disease is declining or getting worse.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, after you have evacuated the vein and examined it, you should look at the white part to see if there is any contraction.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place yourself so that the ray is raised and freed from the chain, and suspend the weight with a strong hand.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut, perpendicular to the first one, and carefully remove the chain from the vein so that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that one and cut into the rear section, after cutting deeply into the base, extract that one and lift it until it passes through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the most superior or highest section of all the sections, ensuring that all are removed; and then cut into it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow and extract and raise, then insert a strong, double-ended needle into it and tie it and extract it, or insert the ray under and turn your hand over to where it is thrown.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cause an incision; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it will come back upon the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is removed, you will place over the affected area vinegar and rose oil and unrose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting that is wrapped around parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must cut open over all the twists of it and at the places where it wraps around, and raise it until it is completely elevated.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein and do not injure it, for it will be difficult to raise it; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of an ulcer:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as sharp as with ulcers nor of acute intensity so as to not affect the vein; it has a thick flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; it has the appropriate thickness on the surface as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs, as it is in the thigh (or groin) area in Arabic lands and in the rear regions of Indian lands that are dry and have little vegetation and no grass or open spaces.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And a very small amount is generated in other parts of the body, aside from the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of this condition is putrefaction, as seen when serpents and worms emerge from within the body, creeping and breeding between the fascia and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending onset of gout is this vein that occurs in the leg, causing severe inflammation; then the affected area becomes tender; and soon after, the vein begins to leave the area of this inflammation, appearing as if it were torn from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the onset of gout appears, you will notice that you must wrap around that part a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Enter within this lead, and know that it lifts the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever you encounter any cause of this gout outside the body, wrap it in lead and know of it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, you will insert a piece of lead and wrap it; but do not insert that which is cut into the flesh until it comes out, for if you do, it contracts and goes inward, causing abscesses, putrefaction at the site, and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated further and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the body and none of its causes remain in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some people have noted that it extends to the length of one's palm and fingers, and I myself have seen it reach as far as 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during treatment, insert the ray into the tract and perforate that long tract through the body, until everything inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein, in some cases, has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes great pain, and it is known to come from any painful branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and pay attention to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine inflammation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine inflammation in various lands, as it causes the animal great pain. It is caused by a small worm that is born between the skin and muscle tissue; it spreads throughout the body, pushing and weakening all its members until it ruptures the tendon and pulls it out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, so that worms and serpents, roundworms, and tapeworms develop in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared by the evil of these worms, for when they enter the body and rise to the head, they attack the brain, strongly seizing it within and destroying it; this is what should be observed.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you wish to cure and extract it, you do not do so unless you understand its movement and appearance, and then you grasp what is above it and what remains below it firmly, and dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery to the place where it resides, and the main reason for fear is the corruption of it which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it is close to the head and affects the eyes, tighten the eyebrow with strong pressure, dry it, and extract that; and remember that the disease uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate corrupt, bad humors, and be careful of foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the section regarding the treatment of pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nefritis in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to tend to a sick woman in a village, and you uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein at the elbow, which you left open for an hour. As you watched it, the inflammation seemed to retreat, almost as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then, put your focus on the pain in that area and pressed it into the muscle, holding for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And repeat this process on the other side, until the pain in both arms is alleviated.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I found myself revolving within my body, according to what I had seen; and I was too amazed by the change of it and the speed with which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, however I have seen many whose intense pain is changed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen this in the feet so severely as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything but that the woman was old, with a dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance, the sensation of that changed wind is felt.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward treatment does not appear in those who are healthy and have moist bodies with veins covered.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to cure them and the patient feels that pain, do not show any apparent concern as we have said, but strengthen over that area and leave it slightly open and dry on that part until that airiness is reduced, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not find them in your feet, then cure that by relieving the body and removing that airiness, and use pills made of excrement and pills of sulfur and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, dull tips, being solid; some have three angles, others have wings, and some are barred.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it is divided into two manners: for the principal members, such as the head, heart, lungs, intestines, bowels, bladder, and similar ones, when it catches in any of these members and appears to your signs of death, which cause you will relate later, then you must avoid extraction of that arrow from those parts where death is that in which the greatest dispositions are, and when these ill signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not concealed in the depth of the member, then extract that and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant, when it catches an arrow in him and penetrates a bone, and it comes out from the base which is over the brain, due to the violent soda, and scotoma, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and mixing up of senses, and furious vomiting, and strong speech is completely lost and voice is destroyed, and from the place of the plague there comes a white humidity resembling powder, and bubbles from it like the fluidity of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of an arrow when it enters the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel a hard pain where it is lodged, not a visible cause; and strongly it causes the movement of the arrow to be similar to the pulse and flow of the black plague, and there is a chill in the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; and thus you know that death descends with all its might.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus from the plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are affected, and there is a change in the patient's appearance, they gasp for air greatly, and demand frequent breathing support.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow catches in the tendon in the foot, and the pain is mainly in the small ribs, then there is a great deal of pain and sighing, and all the muscles of the body are not at their best.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, you will feel strong pain from the poison of the undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, causing a tear in the tissue or hernia, there is no hope for its cure except by removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and it empties urine outside, causing pain to the patient due to some internal cause, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members, such as the face, neck, back, shoulders, hips, legs and their corresponding parts, can be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you understand this about their cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that when an arrow pierces the lacrimal duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose and it is extracted from the other side, leaving the remnants of the arrow in his eyebrow, he recovers and there is no damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew whose eye it had pierced in the gums, leaving the lower eyelid intact; the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a tiny tip to which it was attached, as it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion's skull where no brows exist.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and there was no further harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had fallen into his gullet, and it was an Arab arrow, the kind with feathers; and then I incised between its two barbs, and it was already submerged in the victim's gullet; and then I carefully withdrew it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and he thought that he would die from it; so, after having waited three days without anything changing regarding the man's condition, he incised upon the arrow and ingeniously removed it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	He then encountered a man in whom an arrow had become lodged in his back, and the wound was infected; after applying heat for some time, he extracted the arrow at the root of the injury.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	He also saw a woman whose belly was wounded by an arrow, and the injury was deeply infected, without any change in her condition over time; the woman did not experience severe discomfort in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man whose face is pierced by an arrow, and the wound is serious, so he removes the arrow, causing little pain but many similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracts the arrow from the man, whose face was pierced in the middle of his nose; it had already inclined to the right a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called upon for the treatment of him, as the arrow's wound had become infected within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; and then he inquired about it gently, feeling no pain, except for a slight prickling behind his right ear, and so he hoped that this prickling was due to the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied a poultice to the place with an astringent and digestive property, confident that by doing so, the location of the arrow would become apparent to him, allowing for the drainage of the wound.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not cut into the affected area to avoid any significant accidents that the arrow might have reached; continue applying the poultice over it for several days without incident; and as the inflammation subsides, break up the hernia by gradually removing the poultice every few days until you feel the arrow within its original sheath and heal completely.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should focus on treating the acute inflammatory condition with specific medicines for several days until the fever subsides; gently attempt to dislodge it, and try to retreat the tip of the arrow subtly, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the hernia through that acute treatment until the arrow's tip becomes visibly apparent; then I dedicated four months to this.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And as the hernia became enlarged, I attempted to insert forks into it and hold them there, taking care not to slip or make any mistakes, until one day, through ingenious methods that will be described at the end of this chapter, I managed to extract it using forceps; then I restored the hernia.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, and the disease became solidified, and the malady was healed entirely, without any pain in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that it gives this rule and meaning regarding what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood from the narrative, nor do they comprehend those in the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans speak a little about what is present and much about what is absent; they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes from the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not shot from the members in which they are embedded but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or on the contrary side of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is ejected from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding to a fleshy part, is thrown and ejected outward.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when cats should be fed, then you will find that you leave it for a few days until the flesh around it decays and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to feeding times, you leave it for a few days until it decays and the attraction and motion are no longer present, and it is ejected.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your feeding schedule for a few days, then you will find that you perforate the path of the arrow in that bone at every turn subtlety until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then you extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has pierced one of the ventricles of the brain, and it causes some of those symptoms you described, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it inside until its presence is balanced by some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the brain, and the patient recovers after some days without any of those symptoms occurring, then you should devise a way to attract the arrow and the fluid it produces.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not obey your attempts to remove it, then you should administer treatments along the arrow's path as we have recommended, and tend to the affected area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the body and affects a vital area, then you should explore that attempt, and if you feel it, draw near any objects suitable for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the disease and the length of the arrowhead, here neither nerves nor veins are involved, then pierce the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles involved that are held fast, then you must carefully cut away the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with every tool at your disposal; and devise a plan regarding this, if you cannot dislodge the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes weakened.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of an arrow in any location, then use a torsion of your hand with forceps from all sides until it weakens; and carefully with the utmost subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it can be easily extracted along with its tip.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that with your own effort, then wait for a few days until the parts that are in the path of the arrow can be separated, and then repeat the procedure when the pain has subsided.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience an unexpected flow of blood, apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe your skill in incising veins, nerves, or cords, and use all means at your disposal to facilitate the exit of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by your physician.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow in such a way that the injury follows the shape according to which you aim the point of the arrow, as it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your power, then administer what is within your power according to the shapes.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Pay attention to the arrows that are discharged in the opposite direction of the other party, or that have already begun to penetrate any part from outside, or make the tip of the arrow bulge due to the force applied beyond the desired depth, and then aim at it; and cut it according to the amount it takes for the forceps to grasp; and then fire it, as it is made light for discharge.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the severity of the pain until the arrow penetrates the bone, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not work, leave it for a few days, then repeat the procedure until it heals.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point of the arrow is in that place, then push it towards the affected area.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point has fallen and you want to give impulse, then insert a sharp object and, if it is hard, strike it strongly into the hollow of the bone in the arrow's shaft and push it towards the affected area.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it strongly towards the instrument, as the arrow is pushed away by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is deeply embedded, you must compress all the flesh in which it lies, as much as you can, and treat that area as best you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch the area without danger, then press upon that area until you can remove the arrow without damaging veins or nerves, and treat the wound as necessary, applying remedies to heal it.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Design of forceps for removing arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like the beak of a hawk, equipped with a serrated edge to grasp the arrow firmly so that it does not slip away.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, from large to small, according to the amount of arrowhead and its fragility, as well as the extent of the wound and the compression it suffers.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	A method of pushing out this concave extremity with pain, so that the arrow's intrument is removed from it, and pressure from that side:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	A method of pushing out the concave extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that the arrow's intrument is removed from the concave part and it is pushed out towards that side.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venipuncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for fleubotomy, of which there are several, are as follows: two pulsatile veins closest to the ears, known as the temporal arteries; two located in the two temple areas; two veins in the two tears, called lacrimal veins; a vein in the middle region of the forehead and one in the tip of the nose; two glands at the collarbone; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are known as the jugular veins; and finally, two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are examined, there is one that is cephalic and must be the deep vein; this is commonly called "the vein of the head," it is hard, and consists of a branch of the basilic and another of the cephalic; the people call it "the whole body's vein", the basilic is the vein that terminates in the domestic arm, and it is called 'citellar', while the common people call it "the abdominal vein"; at the end of the arm, and it rests on the fossa, this is where flebotomy is performed, and this one appears on the skin through clear indication; and there is also the small vein, which is between the aforementioned auricular vein and the smaller one nearby, located on both sides.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins: one of them has its origin in the curvature of the deep part of the wild vein; the second is superficial, and its location is below the domestic leg bandage; the sciatic vein, its place is below the wild leg bandage; and on the bandage there are other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is an ancient practice for healing and improving the appearance of old scars, ulcers, and skin conditions on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the method of bleeding them is as follows: it should be done by shaving the patient's head, and rubbing the patient's head on the occipital area where both veins are located, applying firm pressure with a clean bandage so that the two areas where the ears are located appear; and you should seek to have a container beneath for catching the blood, and if you feel the pulse of the vein as described above, then proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the sharp scalpel, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the flow of blood stops (the process known as phlebotomy).
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then hold the vein with your hand above the neck, and make an incision with the sharp scalpel on the vein.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the amount of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the cut as deep as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, apply strong poultices and leave them until they are healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this is preceded at the beginning of the book with the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are located near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent vision problems and acute excesses of fluid in the legs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing a phlebotomy on those parts depends on what you have learned: compress the patient's collar until two veins appear by direct inspection, demonstrating their pulse, and then you will know for certain.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the cord above the vein as indicated by your right hand, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument between them, and elevate the vein; cut it likewise in the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then carefully tighten the bandage around the patient's waist, place your right hand over the vein for an hour, and gently pull and press it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And having recalled them, and made the incision, and drawn them into the beginning of the wound.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the application of phlebotomy to the vein on the forehead is similar to phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, migraines, and putrid wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy depends on what you recommend; it is that the patient's bowels tighten with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a "fossor," which has this shape...
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the bleeding at the point which is on top of the vein in the trench and press on it either with a lean or another tool in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then clean the wound from the trench and tighten it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes, it is opened with a lateral fluotomy, but not like other fluotomies of acute ends; instead, it is from a less extreme end, and the fluotomy is made across, as the bone there is softer and would be easily broken by a subtle fluotomy.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Consider the young veins that are the tear ducts of two eyes, affected by itching and tears from the eye's moisture and dirt, and to facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the fluotomy is that it tightens the collagen in a specific area, then you make fluotomies on those, and you stand over the top of them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the fluotomy according to the transverse direction along a slight incision, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the fluotomy is delicate, then only a small part of its extremity is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then drain the pus as much as necessary, apply pressure on that area, tighten it for a night, and then remove the bandage.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The fluotomy of the nasal vein is effective for acute fever and severe inflammation, and for facial maladies such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when they are long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the advantage of this fluotomy is that it tightens the patient's condition, places its nose with the left hand, takes a delicate and long fluotomy along the middle part of the nasal cavity according to straightness, because the vein does not hurt here, and because the pus begins to flow shortly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure that you complete the flebotomy slowly with your hand and let the blood flow according to your need; then apply pressure for a night, as it is more easily restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The application of the flebotomy to both sides should be done with caution, starting with contraction of the vein and beginning of the healing process, as well as addressing other diseases, pain, and aggressive or bad corrosive ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the disease tightens them in each part with adhesion; and the practitioner should be over the head of the patient, and the patient should lie on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then, carefully perform the flebotomy on the vein with an ample and gradual cut; extract the blood according to the season or as much as necessary; and then close it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then clean the ligament, tighten both veins with a moderate strain so that the illness does not spread, and place it within the bandage where the plague has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the healing of phlebotomy of the veins, it corresponds to small aphthas and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these is to cease the illness in front of you, tighten the neck of it with a bandage, then turn back the lips of it and inspect two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the darkness of both, and this is because there are small black veins in their circumference; and then cut each through with a sharp incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt left, and you do not know which one it is, then you begin with the incision of the most prominent one, and the most obvious pus among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it seem like the two veins that are on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	You may usually cut both veins that are on the lip left.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If both veins that are on the tongue are left, then phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is performed at the preferences that are in the gullet, to the malady of the uvula, and to maladies of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that it follows the malady among your teeth in front of the sun, raises the tongue, and watches for the veins from one side of the tongue and the other, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make incisions on each one; and be careful not to finish cutting with the knife on those arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are fleubotomized in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men. The fleubotomy of them is made according to two methods, either by using a syringe with mild pressure or a delicate olive, or using a cutting knife; it is called 'lessing' if it is done gently, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this lessing is what you use for section, and they are special knives of various widths and subtlety according to the size of the veins and their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of olive fleubotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both the width of it as you go deeper, and it is suitable for opening the concave veins that are full, proceeding from those that contain thick clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive-wood phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of smaller circumference and more subtle extremities, suitable for phlebotomy of small veins containing subtle, acute blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, be cautious with phlebotomy of the basil vein, one of three veins, as it removes blood from the brain and heart, and thus can affect the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is important for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to guard carefully and be cautious in that area, as it has an artery, and if he makes a mistake and adjusts the puncturing of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause bleeding of blood, so it is necessary not to phlebotomize that area with a sharp phlebotomy instrument, but rather to cut it gently.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the causative factor does not appear through a clear manifestation, you must recognize that you should leave that and move to another, or seek some root in its place; or cut into it at the end of the arm, as it is manifest; and then secse that by fleubotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you decide to perform fleubotomy on the middle part of the arm, first recognize the tightness in the arm where you feel the location between the wrist and the elbow, then place your hand over it; bend the arm close to the body and cut into the vein with a concave incision as we have said; also be careful not to hit the artery in any space of the area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, with tension in the ligament, an inflation in the place that you have marked with your hand, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery; therefore avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the blood flow in fleubotomy as with a pinprick, and the pain is subtle, then know that it is from arterial blood; now tie and stop the vessel for a long time; if the bleeding stops because it has been severed, then tighten the bandage and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch the patient from the discharge of urine, and be very careful of them and do not disturb them for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the stone cannot be dislodged and you are not presenting any medical treatment to it, then you cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the end of the stone is contracted and the stone is dislodged; or take a piece of lemon and make that burn, and do as follows: take an equal amount and tighten it over the place of the vein with tape and poultice within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the stone is dislodged, it is good; and if not, treat that with the water as mentioned previously to remember the place of the powder from which the stone was dislodged.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the stone from him is difficult due to the disposition of the location of the pain and the possibility of ligament in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Regarding the dark vein, the flebotomy is useful to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic and branches of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be wary of the flebotomist if he is timid about performing a flebotomy, because there is a nerve involved; then, upon finding the nerve during the puncturing for the flebotomy, a stupor will occur, and it will be difficult for him to heal, and some parts may not recover fully. This nerve causes movement in sensation; if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not visible, you must pause and consider where you are performing the flebotomy with your force, and avoid damaging the nerve.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and provides relief to illnesses of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want to perform a phlebotomy with olive oil or myrtle oil, be sure to choose the vein carefully, as it is the safest of all veins, without leaving any arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to know that in phlebotomy, you must not puncture the vein too deeply, and seek the most gentle place, and pay attention to it, if it is not obstructed by the first strike of a hammer, as this is done on some occasions.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, the pain may be so intense that it is difficult to perform a phlebotomy in the first strike; in these cases, do not pay attention to the pain again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy and its accidents are also factors to consider, which you must take into account for their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translated into English is: "The first [aspect] of which you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of relief and to prevent the occurrence of illnesses; phlebotomy is performed on one of the veins located in the elbow, specifically: cephalic, superficial, and basilic; it is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast during spring and autumn, and in winter, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if it's the first time, after three hours passed from the beginning of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be performed when it proves convenient and necessary, day or night, at any time and in any hour.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it should be noted that phlebotomy is not performed on children under 13 years of age, women who are pregnant should not undergo phlebotomy unless necessary after the fourth month and up to the seventh, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, are generally not subjected to phlebotomy.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be freed from some condition in any way, he should cleanse his internal organs before the procedure with a lion's enema, if there is a great gap retained therein, so that the veins do not throw off the excess fluid during the fleubotomy of the purified organs, which are vital, and they do not affect the primary members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not undergo fleubotomy without sacred knowledge and abstinence from food and drink, nor should they escape from ill health or madness until this is remedied; neither should it be performed on those with hydroptic maladies, or when there is a risk of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent urination, excessive work, exercise during meals or vigils, or any cause that debilitates the body, whether human or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is also important to consider the subtle balance of humors in relation to this: if the spleen is large due to excessive eating and drinking, or because of medicinal treatments, if it is possible to address this through diet and medicine.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse yourself in a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or some exercise for the purpose of relieving the pain.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the bleeding of the patient in the foot at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that foot which is affected on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is tightness, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as when there is excessive work or suffering, or any similar condition.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his side, let the causes be present of which the usual pain of men is aromatic, perfumed, and balmy, and similar to those according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleubotomy instrument over another cushion that is pus than the one of the patient who was to be fleubotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with your hand, massage the flebotomator two or three times; and tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is temperate, that is, not too much or too little, then it prevents the flow of blood; but if it is for relaxation and softening, then it prevents the complete cessation of blood flow.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the constriction, making sure that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are inflated and visible to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the flebotomist should apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy point; and place their left hand's digit on the vein, leaving the location for the flebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is released because veins must be struck while they are expanding due to blood flow, and from those that are full of air and when you stop the flebotomy over that one, it contracts towards the flebotomy point, and the flebotomist has completed their task; and do not let the flebotomy open the vein, and if it does, that vein will become constricted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, the flebotomist should be stopped and engaged in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, after the flebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, it is not good; but otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or applying heat to it, if the location is not apt for cauterization.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is apt for cauterization or the illness subsides, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament, as strong heat from the cautery will cause further inflammation, nor should you immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the flebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and little blood flows, and you fear that it will not be enough, then repeat the flebotomy on that place according to its rectitude, and adjust the opening a little, and apply heat to it before cauterization, because the location is apt for cauterization in most cases where little openings are necessary.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may be marked with a red spot, but do not pay attention to it, as it offers no clue; apply some oil to any part of the wound, as it soothes the body's suffering.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this site than oil or other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil is essential in all phlebotomy procedures where veins must be drained to prevent body corruption, and this becomes a remedy and a sign of wisdom when, upon stopping one of those on that site, the corruption is absorbed and turned back when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy due to various causes, especially when it is not stopped by bleeding but rather by cauterization, or in the perception of a small vein, and then you apply, and press on the spot with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then, he should make sure to do this immediately after the extraction of the blood from that vein or another.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not take notice of it; and if you wish, apply some cause of aloe or myrrh mixed together, or some cause of mint juice or warmth or similar to that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often, accidents occur, requiring flebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that, and if you feel hardness, your compression should be on that; then that eminence is bad and harmful; and thus beware of placing your hand on any cause of what we have said, for strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an embroidery on that where there is stiffness, so that the place becomes hardened, and then take care of that along with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the blood from everyone according to the amount of their virtue and according to the color that appears on the surface of the wound.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the wound is black, leave it to fester until it becomes rogue; similarly, if it appears thick, leave it until it becomes subtle; and if it is acute, until its sharpness diminishes.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be careful with those who are full and strong and require blood extraction at once; in this case, enlarge the incision of the vein and make the flebotomies wider.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, do the opposite; extract it in several stages and make the incision tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best way to perform a vein flebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which syncope is usually incident phlebotomy, and if you cure that before phlebotomy with a little wine infused in water or simple oxymel scalded; and extract it from the blood in three or four strokes.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a chill from the complexion, then take before phlebotomy wine infused in essences of myrrh or honey scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in fragrant and strongly-scented essence.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by excessive blood loss, then take in a drink of beef blood mixed with fragrant essence; and use the aromatics such as alga (a herb?) and soothe your foot at that place.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes as mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the hematoma again, focusing on the part from which flebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the small hematoma little by little, according to the amount of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If one wishes to extend their arm and dissolve the hematoma a second time, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	One who wishes to throw the hematoma from their body in the opposite direction of its decline, should make it be dissolved on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	A person whose body has a great amount of already hardened and acute hematoma, causing fever, should have the hematoma removed in one go, with a considerable quantity being evacuated, and the perception amplified until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the area of the hematoma to prevent death from fainting, as repeated attempts by an inexperienced or negligent flebotomist should be avoided.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to dislodge the arm and expel the blood a second time, if the orifice of the vein is already closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too painful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habitize the layssa (bandage) around it as a second flebotomies; or, if this is not possible, use the sharpness of the flebotomy to coagulate the blood in the vein's orifice; or place a piece of turpentine or sage over it, and apply gentle compression until the blood has drained.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is infected, bandage it and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, you may bleed them on that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the fistula or basilica when they are not found or are obscured, as it is composed of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the vein puncture is that the patient inserts their hand into the water until the wound turns red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that loosened connection with a strict bandage; and puncture the vein according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the incision should be wide, and your vein puncture should be such that you puncture it over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is blocked, insert your hand into the water and hold it there until you succeed in achieving your need, preventing the blood from running in the water.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the hand's motion in cold water, and in winter, the body of the soul is most at rest in cold water during the time of yearn.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the laceration of this vein is considered safer than all other veins, because it has no pulsating blood or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the laceration of the saphenous vein on the right hand is suitable for treating liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the laceration is that you tighten your hand with force or on your own, since you have placed it in cold water, as long as the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then lacerate that one transversely; and if you pierce that one from top to bottom, it will not be of any use.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to end the fluctation with the flail botom, for it leaves the nerves of that completely denuded flesh exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then repeat the hand movement in the water tail and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat those movements in the water tail, the clot will be solidified in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the clot is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified suddenly; and carefully ensure that you do this in every narrow space.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youth of the flail botomy of that with your left hand, it is appropriate for the ailments of the chest.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the flail botomy of him as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the treatment of the superficial vein of phlebotomy is for maladies that are left in the extremities of the body, as well as for illnesses of the heart, and to retain menstruation, and for maladies of old varicose veins and ulcers in the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the illness immerses its foot in water, causing friction until the veins appear; and it is applied over the joint of the foot with a belt; and the position of the vein is then marked after the pus has been drained, and from there it branches out towards the surface of the foot in many directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, drain the pus widely from the vein, leaving the hernia below the foot, after its elevation, for it is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are left underneath the skin of the foot, and place your phlebotomy tool at an angle, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And make the bloodletting successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to raise the leg, then you should immerse the foot in warm water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then he should repeat the phlebotomy in another place, since the spot is clean; and do not fear any harm from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is below the knee at the entrance of the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the purpose of the phlebotomy on him is to relieve hip pain when it is caused by blood stagnation.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the technique of phlebotomy in this case is that the disease enters the veins, and quickly and tightly draws out the blood from the thigh on both sides, using a long, thin bandage, so that it only appears through this means.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, you perform phlebotomy on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the direction, and it is better; either incise it with an incision or sec it with a section, because the location of the disease is hot.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many people very painful; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the sensation of all, perform phlebotomy on one branch of the disease, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And pay attention to the nerves, and let the blood flow from the wound as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then carefully dislodge the tightness and press upon the site of the flebotomy, tightly securing the place, as it is said to be salutary.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilators are of three types: of horns, or of glass, or of metal.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is achieved according to two manners: one of them is through lancing and draining of pus, and the other is through ventilation without lancing.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation through lancing is according to two manners, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilators that are administered through lancing and draining of pus are twelve places in the body, of which one is where ventilation is paused, and it is the last opening in the head; and two openings from each side of the nape; and ventilators under the jaw, leaving the mandible below the mouth; and ventilators of two blades; and ventilators of two holes, and they are each two cubits long; and ventilators of two pegs; and ventilators of two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of the sanies should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus does not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered that ventozacio (venisectomy) be done with fire or heat in any disease caused by congestion within until the body is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to cause venisectomy for illness or continuously, we should do so at the beginning and end of the month, in its middle part, and at any time suitable for it.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of which men are those in whom the sanies (or blood) is multiplied until they require extraction through venisectomy and find great difficulty and pain; and from these, congestion and redness appear on their face and head, and in their eyes; and from these, puffiness appears on their face and forehead and darkness and weakness in their legs; and from those whose place of venisectomy leaks; and from these, their laughter increases; and from these, they taste blood in their mouths or their tongues are inflamed and spitting out blood; and from these, their sleep increases, and from those who sweat blood while sleeping, ancient and painful plagues and other similar causes appear.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it occurs for any reason among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, they command ventilation to be done rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The immediate relief from ventilation of the neck is that when it alleviates pressure on the head and what sinks into the holes; it is more effective than anything else in evacuating all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of cold and wet nature, or where catarrh is present, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, one should not use those herbs, especially in the cases of hardened pain in the joints and on the tops of which hardships are present.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May it be done to him who is lying on his side that he experiences relief; and for this reason you must command the bellows operator to place his hand gently over the suction points, lest there be a loss of the generated relief.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The use of the bellows over the chest (pulmonic) area is instead of phlebotomy of the superficial vein and basilic: and thus it confers relief to asthma, and to the constriction of the airways and the cutting of the muscle of the chest, and to coughing, and to congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the bellows over the chest be gently moved, for if it is suddenly stopped, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the bellows over the head confers relief to accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and pressure, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is instead of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be sure to instruct the fan (or attendant) not to press their hand during the scraping so as not to puncture the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the ventilation of the mouth is done by applying alcohol to it, and for the corruption (or inflammation) of the gums, and for conditions resembling those in the mouth, which are in place of phlebotomy with leech saliva, that is applied between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation that is done on both plates gives a heat cap, which is made by replacing with warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of both parts inside the cavities gives an effect similar to phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral and cephalic veins; these attract the blood from all those manually accessible veins and also from the smaller veins connected to the larger ones, so as to achieve an attraction to the three mentioned veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the bellows-man not to overdo the scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows used to blow over the anus and apply to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should instruct the bellows-man to use a strong bellows, made of iron, for the place needs a firm section; and its delicate blows cut deeply and it is scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The bellows from the legs should be reduced in size gradually, for they draw the blood from all parts of the body, and alleviate old pains from varicose veins and the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and relieve cough and shortness of breath; and they take the place of phlebotomy for two veins, and of the cataplasm and the hot compress, and for two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these weaknesses exhaust the body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (or vents) of the loins, the healing is proper to the healing of the vents of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the vents is that it pauses the vent at the beginning of the wound and sucks by moderate suction, and does not prolong the position of the vents, but rather gently releases them, and retains those tightly, and allows the humors to come to the place due to equalization.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place turn red and swell, and the pain of the wound appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then make incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man whose flesh is tender from old age, be sure to make an incision once and not again, so as not to ulcerate the area.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the windbag to increase the incision depth slightly, and apply suction with facility.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the sanction is great, then you must make two incisions, for the first incision opens the way for drainage of the swelling and its fluid.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Make the second incision to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the large sanction.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the sanction is very foul-smelling, then make a third incision for the final extraction.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we wish to extract the sanction little by little or in small parts, it suffices for us to make an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deep enough.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places where the suckers are applied should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed oil of almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, use butter, or oil of lilies, or camomile, or ginger, similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, sticky, then use oil of amber, or balsamic oil, or aloe oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it must be forbidden from oil; and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with lukewarm water or with water mixed with salt, or with water from a cistern, or with water from a vine, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose leech has a moist sanction, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that one whose excesses are heavy, wash the leeches in old wine, or in water mixed with fennel, which is majoran, or from the distillation of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And take care that the leeching be protected from baths; because it is necessary that it be administered immediately before or after a bath for an hour or two, and take care that the leech rests near the area being treated.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venesection?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who took the blood is irritable and has hot and inflamed Sanch (a traditional medicine made from plant extracts), then take care to provide causes of cooling, such as with milky acid, and in case of swelling, use fennel, laurel, and similar plants.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And interrupt their diet with light foods such as bread, lean meats, preserved foods with spices, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is fierce, take care to give them warm beer with aniseed or cannabis seed, sumac, and a mild wine; and recommend that they consume little food and drink, avoid light foods like chicken and duck, and eat fewer small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And during the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the patient should take more liquids than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is advisable to give some men a light diuretic such as alfaraca or musk, with a taste of nutmeg, before ventilation or phlebotomy, or immediately after, so that the principal members are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not take those harsh remedies.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	One should not perform ventilation on the areas that are subject to sudden blood loss, such as the liver, the surface of the foot, gout, and the umbilic, except in cases of excessive swelling, since these members do not tolerate scarification.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desirable for these purposes other than to attract the pain from a member, thus performing a pause in ventilation on the breast in cases of flux of blood from nasal sinus; and they use this so that the swelling is loosened deep within the member, just as one performs a pause on the abdomen and the umbilic; because it rarefies the member, it scalps it, and eases the pain as it resolves the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is now placed over the ulcers when they occur in their pressure or position, for by virtue of strong attraction it improves the pressure and eradicates the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to be as if it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of heated water in the liver ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is for the ventilation to be filled and for great pus to form, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs are soaked.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of a wound dressing over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the filling should be the amount of a palm; and in the length of it, in the place that is on the perimeter, half of it, the drainage should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use erings or lemons, with thick margins, lions, eagles and turtles to prevent them from damaging the member in its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And the middle of it should have a transverse groove of iron or ering, where a candle is placed over fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This dressing is significantly larger than the one we have previously discussed, and its size may vary according to the illness and the condition of the patient using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cups for children and the exhausted should be different from those for young people and those with strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of stopping this pain with fire on the member is to hold the flame of a well-prepared fire over a small piece of candle wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse blade at the exact spot of the pain, so that the fire surrounds the area without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	After stopping the pain in the patient's member as previously described, and while holding the said position, if we have the gouty inflammations and they do not resist this treatment, the vapor will soon dissolve the inflammation.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Then adjust the flame according to your preference, and repeat the process if needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	It is also possible to use a bellows in the treatment of pleurisy, with water instead of fire, where there is no transverse blade or point, and it is only filled with water and placed over the member without applying heat.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this bellows, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in most members but in those members where it is not possible to place bellows, due to their smallness, as well as the nose and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, as in the case of the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments in the infected waters of open wounds.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is appropriate to lay them in infected water during the day and night until they are painless, and do not cause any harm in the belly of those affected; and evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and bellows; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place a cushion on top.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and bound.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the area with an abscess, it is more beneficial in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the area with vinegar and then apply plenty of hot water; and it should be frothed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the fever of the illness persists and there is discharge from the veins, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water, and place it on top until the discharge stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the fever increases, sprinkle on it vitriol mixed with salt, or similar substances like those used for stopping bleeding, as long as the fever is drained; or place over the area dried beans, and leave them until the beans stick to the site, and the fever is drained.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if, it being necessary, bloodletting be performed, change the leeches when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited, the place should be rubbed with a hot cloth or a needle should be inserted into the area until it bleeds; then they should be stopped, because when the pain diminishes, bleeding will cease.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish them to open, sprinkle some aloe, salt, or ash over it and catch it immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of healing from the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mentioned frequently in medical texts; it deals with the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, my child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it is believed that this method of science in our land is neglected; and you should never forget this at any time; and I have not devoted myself to this later on, except due to the length of reading ancient books and studying the understanding of those times, so as to extract knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have devoted myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science encompasses and on which my experience is based; so that you may understand it concisely and be spared the trouble of elaboration; and I have abbreviated it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it at the conclusion of declaration; and I have outlined in it forms of the instruments that are administered there, by adding to the explanation, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The ultimate compendiums and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those which must be mentioned before we begin the remembrance of wounded members and the various states of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us state in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to those who understand them at the beginning, the artificer is compelled and must stop on the truth of those; it is you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from others like you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, it is said that when you encounter a fracture, dislocation, torsion or displacement of any part, you must immediately consider starting with bloodletting or removing the affected limb, or in some instances, if no other cause prohibits, use cauterization as a treatment, or as the case presents itself, or whether it be weak from age, or is in a state of decrepitude, or it's time for a violent heat, or violent friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then, it is sufficient in its diet with herbs that are bitter and lean meats and crabs; and prohibits fatty meats and foods that fill the veins of the body, as long as you are careful to avoid gangrene, and if you do not fear the effusion of material into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original condition, by which they are usually corrected.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the broken bone begins to be restored, you should know that the hernia should be fed with nourishing foods rich in fat and heavy in substance, such as bread cooked with water, rice, beans, meat, veal, fresh fish, and similar foods, and according to this regimen, a coagulation of the fracture will take place more lightly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones in the legs of old men or those who are withered cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the shrinkage of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continued according to their nature as long as there is shrinkage of those limbs, and they are only continued and consolidated at the end of inactivity, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause resembling gout in which there is inflammation that adheres and strengthens, until it becomes hardened and glued together, until the end of strength and firmness, as with fire at the beginning, unless some cause does not prevent its actions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, food that has weight and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fractures varies according to the variety of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the kinds of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now I recall all kinds of fractures, explained in their respective chapters separately.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures lie within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are various species of bone fractures in themselves; for some are curved fractures or those that occur in them stars; and sometimes it is a fracture according to the length of the bone: these are stage and stellate fractures, and others proceeding and not proceeding, as is done in the case when it is prepared to write, and fracture by plague and dislocation in the head, and small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own peculiarity or torment in restoration according to the distinct recollection of its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A clear sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how it translates: "And for this reason is known the fracture of the bone: its deformity, and that prominence and sensation of it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no deformity in the location nor is any pain felt when touching the bone due to its movement, then it is not a fracture, even though the illness may not cause much pain.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformity or a small fracture, where you do not feel any pain when pressing with your hand, and then there is a sensation of pain due to compression; at this point, apply remedies of which you remember appropriate ones for the location; and make them tight for subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the location where it is curved and not split into two or anything else that does not happen in stages, when the whole part of its comparison is disturbed, then you must begin from your hour to correct it with caution after it has occurred.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it occurs that the abscess is severe, leave it for a few days until the abscess ceases; then dress it in any manner you can using light and clever techniques.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of the intestine and the stitching of it is lighter than the operation on bones where the damage occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen it according to the recollection of the intestines.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If there are severe fractures in the bones, it is necessary to extend this broken member from both ends, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ligatures or one ligature and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position the member as it was naturally before, while the fractures are extended in the broken member; then perforate to ensure those additions return to their proper places, using any manner of clever techniques you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care, according to your strength, that you do not cause harm to the patient through your operation, and pierce yourself according to your ability, applying heat or cold as is best for each case.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And make sure that at that opportune moment you apply your hand to it, and if you notice any different cause, correct that and suppress it with the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscesses with their operations, or contracture in the member, as we have seen this happen from their operations on their patients.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, adjust, and perform a proper operation with stricture on that member, providing rest and tranquility; caution the patient over it and have someone keep him from moving that in the hours of his watchfulness and sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and take charge of its management, and pay attention to all its movements at the greatest strength; and wait until you know that the position of the member is a position that ensures pain, which causes it when in the disposition of the position of the member, or there is damage; then understand that you change its position from that one where no pain is felt; and take care that the position of it be straightened and aligned, so that no distortion occurs to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the limb at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the broken limbs differ in their fragility, and in their size, and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the wrist and similar to those, you should understand that the envelopment should be with very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thick like the thigh or the leg, you should understand that there must be a complete and hard envelopment, for the lateral bandage connects the large member and tightens it from every side, so that nothing interferes with it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, properly position your evacuation of the equilibrium, applying appropriate pressure to it over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps depending on the member; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then I observe that at the beginning of the fracture site, there is more swelling, so tighten your hold on it to prevent further movement in the fractured area.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then I gradually stretch the wrapping around the fracture site and slowly ease up on the tightness, so as to open up the space at the site little by little.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then I take another bandage and wrap it around the twisted area, covering the previous wrappings; and observe the openings left by the fracture, both on top of and below it. Your operation should be on the tightness of the new wrappings and in softening them as we have said about the initial wrappings above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then I place a stop or cloth between the wraps to accommodate any curvature in the fracture, if there is one; otherwise, do not place anything in it for no reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand over the other part, and cover these neatly arranged sterile bandages over it, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and press on what has the abscess and reduces the inflammation; leave that for a few days, and then tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of different types of canvas, carefully made; or of wooden splints; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, remember that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thicker and longer than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the member in size and smallness; then tighten the bandages over the other part as per your initial structure; and then arrange them properly over it as we have said regarding the structure, and it should be according to your structure, especially in the location of the fracture, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the less the tension.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be strong in thickness and fineness, and are numerous; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in some operations where the thread of the cord is knotted, it is a great mistake when tightness is not uniform.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Indeed, very thin threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and it will not be possible to fit a thread between two fingers smaller than a finger itself.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient's condition is aggravated by stiffness in the joints, then apply tightness at those places, placing a pad of leon (wool) or twisted flax between them to prevent any injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the fracture is as a plague, causing disruption in the chain, and it comes to mind again in those who study it according to its specific features.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a whole limb that is broken does not allow the application of a splint on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it cannot be covered by a splint until several days have passed, or perhaps seven or ten, depending on your certainty of preventing an abscess from forming.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting as a quick way to restore a fracture, especially suitable for complex cases and primarily for women and children, because it is something over which heat or friction should not pass: and you take flour dust, the core of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that is not sufficient, then take a thin and soft cloth, and form it into a not too thick or subtle construction, and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all grounded from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe, each in equal parts; mix them with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's wound is fresh; apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and it benefits most people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plastering method that aids in fractures and twists: prepare mallow and white alder, each from dragon's blood, 10 parts; myrrh and aloe, each 5 parts; acacia, 6 parts; and Armenian bole, 20 parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients should be mixed in a mortar with a strong base, and combined, applied to the affected area, or taken with water or egg albumen and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering and separating joints and bones from their locations; this causes an accidental pain in those and in cracks and fractures: take fine wool, submerge it in hot wine and oil, and place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not only without restorative power but also cauterizes and expels pain effectively.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores closed bones: take dry fig leaves and poppy leaves, mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a quick plaster administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you desire a resolution from an abscess: take root of althae, camomile flowers, violet flowers, whole meal flour, all finely ground; mix them with hot wine, if the member is not scorched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scorched, then apply that to the affected area with cold water from mint or cold water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a poultice for stronger resolution than the first mentioned, when there is a hard abscess, is to prepare a mixture of fennel root and seeds, dill, lovage, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, and any other herbs; all should be crushed and steeped in sage or rosewater or vinegar according to the condition of the member and the color of the wound.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not state in his book that it should be placed over the affected member before its restoration unless it is done with wax and oil, and for no other reason; he recommends that it should be between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A snake may be placed over the broken member after its restoration and for the causes of its withering, just as myrrh, onions, and similar herbs are used for similar conditions.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of rye flour, wool from sheep's skin or goose feathers, and salt, mix them well, grind them and strain them, then make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the inflammation and, if it is not painful or causing pressure, or if the bone is not broken, it is not advisable to dislocate it; in such cases, you should not force any movement for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	However, if pain, pressure, or inflammation occurs at the site, you should immediately remove the plaster or splint and rest the affected area.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, soak it in hot water, and apply it to the area until the pressure and pain are relieved; then let the member rest for an hour. Next, place over it clean wool soaked in warm vinegar and oil or rose oil, and cover with a cloth for a night, ensuring there is no infection and that the swelling in the member has subsided, and the pain is eased.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that delicate stricture, applying a small plaster and not straining it with your initial tightness, but gently pressing it until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, swelling, pain, and inflammation, and all other symptoms have subsided, and you feel a need for a plaster and additional tightness, then repeat that process as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no such cause occurs in the member as we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, according to your judgment, due to the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the tightness more than your initial tightness, and regulate the quantity of food for the patient, according to the recall of their condition.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you find the location of the fracture already cleaned and prepared but not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; so embrocate that area with hot water several times daily for three days; slightly ease the tension, and through this operation direct the nourishment to the member, and it will be healed gradually.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But here's what the foolish restorers of a member fracture do differently when they don't cover it properly and restore it according to its curvature, which is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if it were a skilled surgeon, he would open up the area and heal it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have seen none of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Chapter 2: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct; some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that stops all the bones within the joint, leaving them shattered, just as it does in a club, and for this reason this type is called comminuted; or space cuts through some part of the bone, cuts through its flesh, and the incision does not pass through its posterior part; and this type of fracture is called complete dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the complication of these two fractures is either great or small, and from fracture that involves compression or traction; and its cause is due to sudden impact or violent collision with a hard object, and they resemble each other in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the pancreas and leaving the bones exposed, or it occurs on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a fracture that is damaged in the bone, at the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture that occurs either through an accident or the impact of a heavy object, causing some bone lamina to break off inside and resulting in a concave shape as seen in hernias when their inner layers are pushed out, and it is also caused by the sudden breaking of their entry into the depths.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This primarily occurs in the bones of children, as their bones are soft.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractures, they are painful as if the stars are separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then, the doctor should reflect on all of this at its location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have come to know all these kinds of fractures by observing them and examining their appearance and the evident corruption of flesh present on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And this capillary is known for what is discovered over the bone, it is washed and cleansed on it, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the onset of illness and accidents, and if you examine the symptoms that indicate by their manifest signs of evil, such as vomiting from anger, extension, loss of understanding, muteness, fainting, acute fever, excretion of humors, and redness of those affected, and they resemble the symptoms in the major dispositions, then it is not a cure.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you detect incorrect accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the pain comes upon you at the beginning as it does and this happens during the winter days, then you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you must know that you should cut open the bone on the 7th day, after which what remains of the bone will be corrupted by pannicul, and accidents as we have mentioned will occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pannicul covering the brain and is in small, torn pieces, then you must know that you should incise the divided and bruised part as I have mentioned before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you cut open the patient's thigh, and discover the bone according to custom and method as possible according to the figure of the plague, and it should be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you are forced to detect the bone, discharge of pus or abscess cauterize it carefully, stand over it with something that covers it, and fill the area with bandages soaked in wine and rubbed oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin at the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is according to one of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you cut the bone with a sharp incision tool straight like this, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incision tool to this, slightly broader than that; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer a broader incision tool than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should choose the number of incision tools necessary, some of which are broader than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are very sharp at their ends, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their help to facilitate the incision without damaging the head or causing harm to that person.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it in a circular motion before applying the scalpel, which are called non-penetrating cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone to which it is attached, so that at the cut, the tip or edge is round, not sharp, resembling a small circle or margin, which prevents it from being submerged and penetrating through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each one suited to the specific nature of each bone, as long as your scalpel is sharp on all parts of the skull, with its length and brevity according to the amount of sharpness of this cut.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three types of treatments: When perforating the circumference of a broken bone, place the treatment over the bone and rotate it until you know that the bone is penetrated; then change the treatment to another location and apply it where it passes through all the thickness of the ray or surround it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with scissors what is between each part of the bone, making it thin enough to be able to place over it in a delicate manner, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool that you use to press it, as well as with such thimbles and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to take all precautions so that the scissors do not touch any part of the healthy tissue.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have pierced the bone and it is separated from the healthy tissue if it continues to be attached, take out that fragment, carefully scrape and rub it on the roughness of the bone where it is in the other tool similar to scissors, but nevertheless be sure that it is more gentle and subtler than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you break any part of the small or large bones, take what is most convenient to you from your tools, and then treat the wound with liniments and bandages as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operating is light, free from pain, which dissects bone and muscle with great ease; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, while you have uncovered that part, and have stopped there the end of this slow and gentle cut, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts ahead in length, thus as you see; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike with a small hammer on the cut of a part until it is completely through the bone, while you are sure of the skin that no accident happens to you in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their diseases; certainly, he would have been sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a fracture occurs involving the panicle (adipose tissue) in certain parts of the bone, one should incise it with a curved scalpel at its edge, and deliver it from the body easily, as it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panicle, and what is detached or left attached to the bone is the fascia, which has asperities and subtle fibers, then you should smooth those asperities and eradicate those fibers with delicate razors that you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them in all areas the most suitable for their use and the most correct according to what you are doing during your operation on the fractured bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should administer in your reasoning with which you saw the bone at the beginning using the most sharp of those razors, and then use them on the thinnest part of it, without ceasing to do so according to continuity until you have administered the strongest and thinnest of these to all parts.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Place small capillary and delicate fractures in one of the other breaks, ensuring you administer treatment according to what you find for its rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all who have studied that art are proficient in it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us dwell on what he has written, having shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicle is contracted when you dislocate the bone, then take a cloth from it according to the extent of the damage, immerse it in hot oil and place it over the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or doubled, immerse it in wine and oil and place that over the first cloth, making it as loose as possible so as not to press the tissue; and then apply a latrine (or poultice), and do not tighten it unless the wound is large.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for one or two days until you are certain of the abscess's safety; then remove it and administer medicines that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of herbs, powder of plants and of aristology, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to the patient all medicines of the proper kind from which they abstain and do not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not allow any impurity such as pus or other; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is attached to the pannicle of the brain, it corrupts and kills it, and causes great evil to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it causes harm to the head's blood vessels, as it cleanses the bones and most notably when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if it harms the patient the accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is harmful in every way.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if a dark discoloration does not occur from the medicine applied to it, but rather because of that medicine, then you should take some honey and finely ground olive oil in equal parts, and with those lines wrap a cloth, and then place it over the affected area; and subsequently apply the curative spices that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather from a combination of two bones, or one of those small ones seen, since it has two bones within it; the break occurs in the cartilage, and it is not truly broken, but rather subjected to atrophy, curvature, and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert a small piece into its nose, and with the same instrument fix that fracture from within, and with another from without, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your ease, and be careful not to cause harm with your operation on the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not heal towards that part, then cover it so that it is even with the edge of the rib where the swelling is greatest.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do it like this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And open it again to restoration in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, return the seventh or tenth day after the injury for further rest.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, if it's in two parts, and make sure the amount of cloth fills the nasal cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus, some of the ancient remedies are that the joints should be bathed in a border of herbs, and changed throughout the day, which I have not seen; after covering the joint with albumen of chicken as a paste made from flour; then lay it until the bone is firm and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And at times, they may insert something into the nose instead of a joint, due to its proximity, as it is wrapped in lion's cloth; and if you already have a fracture of the nose, painful and that malady does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this choice is not necessary; and if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use joints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another incident occurs with a post-operative abscess, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or a stick dipped in vinegar and warmed oil, or use a diaper.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not accidentally cause an abscess, then cover it with external plaster made of sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg white; and place your hand on the affected area, applying no pressure for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you break or fracture the bones of the nose, then you must clean them and extract any fragments using appropriate instruments; and with a cut, care for it with what is necessary to heal and solidify, and apply suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must clean it with vapors and administer lead enemas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter .iv.**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**On the Restoration of the Mandible When Fractured.**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only outside, not divided into two and bent inward, then its healing will be light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert your right little finger; and push with that the whiteness of the fracture inward to facilitate its healing outward, with your other hand from the outside of the bone's fracture. And do it equably thus.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then ensure that you administer extension to both parts according to their rectitude, so that their alignment may be possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a shock of teeth loss due to disruption, then tighten those of which you hope will heal with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large, well-made star cloth on top, or a piece of sole leather matching the length of the mandible; and then secure it to her according to your expertise in binding her wound and the application that suits her, as long as she is not harmed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And order the patient to rest and be at peace, and abstain from food and greedy drinks.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should remove and loosen what has become stuck, and correct what has been distorted by him, and apply to it a powder from wheat, or egg white, or chamomile flour, since you will have kept the bandage over him, and place upon the plaster a dragon's blood.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And having thus attached and adjusted the plaster over him, and the arrangement of the bones is not altered, leave it, unless it becomes loose while he heals and strengthens the fracture; for usually this fracture tightens up within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication of abscess occurs, then administer what we have mentioned before in the treatment of him until he heals, and clean that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it involves a detached piece of bone or fragments, then you must be subtle in applying pressure to those fragments with what suits this case during the removal of those from the tools.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound of the fracture is narrow, then you should widen it with a flap operation according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have removed those fragments, and if the wound of the fracture is not yet wide enough, then you should make it wider with the incision; otherwise, place a plaster over that one of the splints suitable for this case and bandage it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text provided is a series of medical instructions in a medieval treatise, and the final line "Capitol .v." might indicate a section heading or a reference to a specific chapter or topic within the text. Without additional context or more lines from the same document, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation for this particular phrase.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork when it is bitten.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the tendon attached to the fork breaks, it can be fractured in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or severed into two parts that do not occur simultaneously; it is more difficult to restore it; or it occurs in such a way that there are complications, making restoration difficult.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for the operation on that fracture, when it is a severe case, you must have two assistants present, one holding the broken fork and another extending the leg at the site of the break.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then apply the splint to the fracture in such a way that it takes the shape of the limb, without leaving any prominences or cavities.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you require more extension, remember to place a piece of cloth or wool between the patient's thighs, and adjust its length according to your need; then stretch and raise the fork with your hand until you feel the tension as you embrace the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the fork to reach the affected area, as it has reached its limit, then have the patient lie down on their back, and place a cushion over the affected muscle, half as thick as needed.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should massage the muscle at the affected area while holding the fork's end against the bone in the joint, raising it until it aligns with the other side; then correct the fracture and stabilize it using your hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any stiffness in the fork and it is causing discomfort, then carefully cut away the excess material to make it more flexible.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, you will ingeniously make an incision from one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had previously placed the fork, the tool used for digging, to the side; and this is the form of the instrument:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a cup in which this is the concave shape; and its size should be according to what you have needed for it, whether it's the size of the bone or the depth of the issue.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, thus, one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have made when you extracted the fragment from the bone is wide, and it's secure from further damage, then you should adjust both edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is minor or you fear a bad infection, you will use moist drapes and poultices according to the amount of plague tissue rupture.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess forms dangerously, then insert a cloth soaked in hot oil and vinegar, and place it over the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone infection (plague) and its swelling are severe, apply a paste made of flour and egg albumen, place it over the affected area, and hold it there. Then, take a thin table knife with a length and width of about three fingers and one palm, and make incisions around the plague, but not too deep. Apply powder twice over the foot and the paste; then wrap that in cloth. Also, wrap the cloth around the knife in the same area as the fracture. When you remove it, turn it inside out, keeping the plague's dreg and its bad odor away from your body, and return the paste to its whole form, and when the bone fracture's swelling decreases, this is what should not be overlooked.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the bone is not completely shattered; and for that reason, whenever you see the injury each day, if the ligament becomes softened or you notice the star already being re-shattered, you will correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then you should restrain the patient's sleep on their side, and each night place a small cushion beneath them to prevent their body from sinking too much; so that at that time the patient's supporters are elevated from the side of that area, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised above the muscle; or, alternatively, the patient's arm should be lifted towards the collarbone.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless it becomes too tight at the site of the injury or abscess, within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then you should change the dressing if you see any sign of its deterioration and adjust its tightness, restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the furcula is healed and the wound is sealed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and supported according to its nature in twenty-eight days, and in some cases in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of a Broken Shoulder**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the shovel is broken in its lateral part, but it is not completely shattered, only the edges are damaged.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the part is broken and it is broken in the middle part of its side, and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural position in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a poultice of flour and honey on the broken area, and stop it with cloth; apply a layer of fine powder; and place a thin sheet of tablecloth over it according to the extent of the broken blade or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the spine is concave in any part of the spatula, then you fill that concave space with a stopgap, and properly adjust the spine.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly over the dilated tongue with a constrictive band, maintaining the proper position of the spine until it is no longer necessary to keep it in place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and properly adjust the spine if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep an eye on the patient at their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spine will be restored in ten days or twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore, when this period is complete, you will dissolve the ligament, and be sure that it is from among the bones whose beginnings are not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a ligature there, then you cut over it, hold it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the rib of the snakebite wound cauterization if this should happen here.
Capitol .vii.	**Capitol VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A broken foot sometimes breaks in the middle part and tends to remain that way; its ends may be healed but the middle part remains fractured and disjointed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And one of the dangers of this fracture is that it causes a decline in strength, resulting in great pain, difficulty walking, coughing, and severe vomiting; it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press the muscles of the patient, adjust the ribs to the joints of the two ribs, and be subtle in the operation of it and in the placement according to every manner possible and suitable for it, so that the shape of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and stopgap over it, using a thin table of salt or chalk, and similar substances in elevation, as you wrap that with cloth; be subtle in fastening that over the broken bone so as not to cause harm; occasionally adjust the bandage according to the curve of the back, and tighten that which is too loose; constantly consider the bandage throughout the day, and when it softens, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of that, due to corrosion or pressure or pain or swelling that occurs in the area, then you cut and loosen that, and remove the plaster and correct what happened by way of healing; reduce the plaster, if needed, and adjust the bandage so that it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly but in serious places that affect the back; and regarding their ends, away from the point of impact, it is not the case that they become tight at those sites, but rather due to what they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not hidden from feeling, you must inquire about his condition to understand it.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it treats the fracture as well as possible, according to its condition, and then apply a compress and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is moving towards the internal parts, it causes severe pain and piercing for the patient, similar to what happens to someone who has suffered a wound, due to the bone's inflammation; this also leads to difficulties in movement, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is one of the most difficult conditions to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And ancient remedies are ingeniously crafted from that clever substance.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them, they say: cover that which prevents food from the malady that causes inflammation and bloating, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is pushed out of place.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should avoid this at all costs so that it does not cause a minor wound to turn into a dangerous abscess if left untreated; and if it already has, then prompt assistance is required.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also say that some remedies should be applied externally and then suck out the weakness; and it seems reasonable, yet it is feared that the wind might throw excess fluid into the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also say: cover the area with cloth that has been soaked in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, compressing it according to its shape; and then it is treated for abdominal pain using both internal and external pleurisy remedies and medicines.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the disease causes violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the disease, then cut open at the site, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over it to preserve the integrity, remember the procedure, and cut through the bone to facilitate extraction.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the ulcer if it is large, using stitching, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If an abscess occurs inside the body, cut open and apply poultices of heated oil to the site, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And elevate the patient's body part on which they lie, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can be fractured, and they tend to lose their shape, resembling the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already relaxed, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch those parts, nor feel pain when pricked with a needle, then you know that they will not recover, and in such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain from compression and pricking in those areas, then know that the fracture of the bone is safe and the illness will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider their weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that it has already softened, apply to those parts where it occurred in the most, and when you lie on your back, take deep breaths and strive for ease, and sometimes it rises on its own and the person wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not attempt to treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause occurs from those, then the cause is better and more easily resolved.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is to pierce at the relaxation of the affected spine with a hot cautery or oil, or sometimes with vinegar; place this on that area several times a day until the cautery relaxes the affected part.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a comforting and firm bandage, tightening it around that area; and instruct the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you encounter a dislocation of the thigh bone or any other cause that has already separated from it, then cover it with a dry cloth and place the affected bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing if necessary; and treat the surrounding flesh infection until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of the thigh bone is broken and it is the end of the femur, then insert your left hand's thumb into the gap between the bones and try to fit them together with your other hand as best you can; and then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if these are necessary, and tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones within it, then bind over them and support the affected area, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of health.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is not uncommon in the extremities of those parts, and they pierce through to the inside; and this causes pain to the patient at the site and a numbing sensation in the limb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration is that you place your hand over the area of the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the end of the limb, then you should wrap it according to what you have learned by similar reasoning, so that it takes on its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or has already begun to separate into parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so once you have secured it, apply the plaster and then place a strip of wood or canvas over it, tightening firmly without fear of breakage or removal of the bandage.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And open the concavity so that it accommodates the swelling until it acquires the right level of firmness, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If there is a risk of abscess, stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is calm, and apply what was mentioned previously; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there is damage to the bones or they are broken, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the broken assistant (or: support).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a flat piece of wood, roughly cut, according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And it should be seen in both ends of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on their side; then throw your broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the middle part where the curve of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the physician should extend it to the parts below; and the surgeon should place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture returns as it ought to be.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their chest with one hand while the other minister examines the fracture, and one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other examines the pus beneath; and each of them stretches out according to their ability.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to increase the extent of the stretch, tighten your grip on the fracture and on the other ligament, and each of the two ministers stretches out in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half below the fracture towards the collarbone.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the collarbone, you should stop the ligament at that location and over the collarbone.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse that in easy water and facilitate the work; then, as it is immersed according to its nature and applied with proper application, tighten it gently if it does not cause gangrene cautiously.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If it happens that gangrene occurs cautiously, then leave the tightness within the seventh day, place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rosin on it to rest until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to tighten it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on that support, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unravel the cloth and tighten it around the arm support to keep the arm in place without any movement if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that it rests on the fracture that is both thick and strong compared to the other bones; and it positions the width between each bone according to their shape, and the length of the bones according to the break, adding three parts from the total measurement.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the bones with the strapping or bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the strapping or bandage over the fracture site should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the tighter the fracture is held, the less restrictive the strapping or bandage will be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, after adjusting the position of the bones and the strapping as we have said in the moment when you restore the member to its proper place, then you will have completed your task.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, then leave off the compression and the bandages within the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And likewise, consider the dressing in all parts for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation at the site; and avoid food that reaches the member due to excessive pressure; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that nothing further will occur from it, then do not untie the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm compress filled with wool on the affected member, and consider at all times during night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved from the broken member, or that the dressing become softened; therefore correct it according to your discretion.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that at the beginning the food is subtle until it begins to thicken, and then you will notice that the food of the patient becomes thicker.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the custom of the assistant and the leg support, they should be tightened for 10 days; and then you will notice that they become loose, and baths should be administered and they should be medicated with ointments that correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is old and infected, you will not loosen that ligament and stitches within one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	**Chapter XII**
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	**On the Restoration of Arm Fractures**
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the humerus; of these, one is smaller, and it is this that is known as the little finger side, and the other is larger and is supported below by the smaller bone, extending upwards.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger or smaller portion of the bowel is severed, it is usually cut at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller portion of the bowel is severed above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the larger portion of the bowel is severed below, the fracture of it is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the most severe case is when two bones are severed at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller portion above, it is good for the doctor, as he must restore it, which can be easily facilitated while it is still fresh.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger portion is what is broken, then it requires more extensive treatment as a result.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are made simultaneously, then be sure to press the extraction most strongly.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And be sure to place your hand in the position of restoration and extension over one cushion, and the wrist of your hand at a lower position than all others, so that the patient's pain is reduced on a carefully prepared bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at the appropriate height or angle, so that the patient is not under strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the attendant should extend their arm away from the patient with your hand or bandage, and another attendant extends theirs above it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bones within to reduce it according to the best position possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstructions, then you must reduce all the weight to its proper place using your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separation in it that affects the tendon and is not to your hope for its restoration, then you must cut off on it and stop it according to the manner we have spoken of above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe and you have already dealt with it in a special way, then take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line it with a cloth made of oiled rosin and white wax, acting with caution between skill and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over that subtle tension until the abscess yields; then remove the plaster and apply a paste prepared from powdered millstone and owl's clay, and place the bandage; and make sure the bandage that is placed on that fracture is both closer and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major positions, either in a single fracture or in two fractures together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater strength and intensity, and as the tightness on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts of it increases, ease the pressure slightly more gently according to the progression of the relief in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to tighten them should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, and as the pain occurs in the member, then apply water or some other remedy to the member until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And you should not restrict the member until it relaxes, then return the tightness appropriately.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness is already relaxed and the bone has healed and looks like those, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then you should gently relax that one for a few days until it can receive nutrition, and then strengthen it appropriately.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to relax it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then hold the patient's hand with your virtue to prevent restless movements, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or in 42 days, or much sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the parts and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers**
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal quickly unless the cause of the injury is treated.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand suffers a fracture or dislocation, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and places their hand gently over the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the physician should carefully straighten the broken bones and secure them in place with splints, ensuring they are aligned correctly.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover with a plaster and stop it, if you do not want to risk an infection; and place a sheet over it according to the extent of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the inner parts near the belly of the hand, then make it resemble a piece of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their fractured hand; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it tightly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cloth from the body should be like a piece of cloth in which something is wrapped, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it as much as it covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in external parts, then cover it with cloth and another piece of cloth left on the palm, so that the hand is covered and right; and tighten the bandage, just as the hand is moved to its normal position between the joints.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you suffer a fracture in one of the bones of the finger, when it is the middle finger, it should be wrapped according to its shape and then tightly bound with the palm, and if you wish, place a small right splint beneath it to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers, such as those of the middle, index, thumb, or ring finger, it should be wrapped and bound to the finger it affects; or all fingers can be wrapped together in succession, which is better; or a small splint can be placed beneath it, just as we have said for the middle finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, the proper position of the aperture of the abscess, carefully and opposite - during your operation - to what covers when any cause of those occurs, as it is described iteratively.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, extending to the surrounding area and filling with pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed around the fracture, and the patient is laid on their belly and their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the ligament according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is desired to open the thigh, then the ligament should be tightened towards the direction of the pelvis, so that extension occurs in it, and another ligament is placed around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if it seems that the rupture is in the same place, then make the specific ligament at the site strong and extend it to the surrounding parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should align the bones in their proper positions as they reduce the dislocation, ensuring that the bone is joined by a good connection; at this point, it is important to apply bandages and compression, otherwise, the member may become infected.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an infection occurs in the infected member, then leave it for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and later return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be done as follows: it is necessary to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, folding it two or three times, and squeezing out any excess; then, wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the injury.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of linen between the thigh and the leg near the joint, then bring the ends of the strip from both parts, making them superior to the two parts, and then turn it over on the leg and thigh, removing what is superfluous from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and place one of those stones on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the thigh and the leg with soft drapes, so that the constriction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong constriction from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four folds, and as you move farther away from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the strip to the other parts until it reaches the toe joint, and tighten both ends of the stones from the other part so that the ligament does not come out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then carefully apply the compression to that area, ensuring it does not cause damage or infection or inflammation similar to those; and if any cause arises from them, then take care to dislodge it and correct what has happened immediately, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone due to pressure, then cover it as best you can; if not, make a cut over it and remove whatever is causing the pain, and treat that from which the pain arises until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be reduced to its proper position, as we have said in the aid and treatment of the leg.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in this manner, do not cause the patient to become lame; and if it is restored by itself, use the other leg for walking, otherwise it will be necessary for the injured leg to rest.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that this condition is acute in 40 days or a month or slightly more, and all of this depends on the diversity of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often ends in prolonged pain, frequently causing constriction and tightness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture happens, it is often nothing more than a crack or break in its parts, and this is what is commonly called 'plague' or 'sore', and it has been the subject of much discussion.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, within the limits of what can be added and connected according to reason, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and press upon that round spot, if it is needed; tighten around it with a suitable bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended for other fractures, so too with hot and cold treatments as appropriate to each case until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally, and the operation on one is the same as on the other.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the broken bone is a fine splinter, the leg is shattered in many pieces.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the broken bone is thick and deep, you will find those fragments, and it is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the fragments according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has not yet formed a callus, extension should be less and more gentle, and you should favor healing with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you bind the steels and complete all the surgery, you will take pieces of wood from a tree where the causes are left in place, which are fixed with palm strips; align them from those that require less thickness, and do not be too hard on your hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from the inside to the deepest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each leg separately with a sheet in two layers according to its length, place one at the junction of the leg's bend from one side and another from the other, and they should be at the same depth as the sole of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then fasten both sheets at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, so that with this tightness the leg is prevented from bending at the junctions of right and left, and it stays in a stable position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a compress of cloth according to the length of the leg; and place it on the leg so that it retains its flexibility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, ensure that you do this in case of fracture, and when that condition is truly the issue.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each leg daily and examine it thoroughly, watching for any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such condition arises, be prepared to treat it with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capital XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their healing.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not experience a fracture in all cases; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely experience fractures, but they may suffer from wear and tear due to poor positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become displaced towards one another, then the patient should lie on their side with the affected foot elevated between them.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over that which is elevated between the bones, and press down on those, squeezing them, until they return to their proper position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then tighten it around the foot with a gentle stretch, as you have wrapped it with cloth and other means, which are necessary for its healing.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is just as you know it.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if it is indeed broken, then restore those, and engage them again as you have learned and practiced in the restoration of these bones with your hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place this broken bone in line with the length of the finger, and slightly on one side; and put the foot back on this table which you have adjusted, and tighten that around it gently.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place your hand on each side of the broken part wrapped in a lion cloth, tighten the table at the base of the foot, and stand on one of the table's legs to make an incision in the sole for good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is also important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned above in other fractures due to accidents we have discussed; be prepared for any such accident.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII.**
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On Fracture of the Knee Joint (Femur), Thigh Bone (Hip), and Shins (Male)
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee joint (femur) is fractured, make an incision in the middle of the curved surface, then gently tilt the leg slightly forward and secure it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the cavity with hot compresses, applying them to the affected area as needed; and the woman is made to bend her knees and elevate them slowly, so that all discharge comes out until the cavity is emptied in front of the separation of the wound and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powders on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, facilitate the opening of the cavity and collect the urine; then reduce it and return it in the same way as you mixed it at the beginning, and return them to their original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, as it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep bladder and insert a cane tube into its opening; then place the entire bladder inside the wound and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated within the wound, as the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with a bandage and remains for some days according to our recommendation, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and healing process, we apply what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be overlooked in these proximal fractures, which rarely occur, especially to those who have little knowledge or experience with this my book; for that fracture presents itself to you in the greatest dispositions for direct restoration and tightening, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a broken arm, take a splint from above and place it on the arm; then wrap it with cloth, and wrap it again, and lay it for three days or so, until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are injured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an accident, especially if the bone is large, as with the bone of the thigh or its helpers, or similar to those that you amputate and cauterize as soon as possible, if the circumstances of amputation or cauterization to you or by testimony require it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection spreads to the sanies (veins or arteries), then you must cauterize it by applying pressure as you do when sealing veins, if other causes do not prevent it.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if otherwise there is a risk of gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you encounter an apothema (abscess) carefully, then leave its restoration within the sixth day, until the abscess is gone, and do not approach it on the third day and the eighth of every month, for you would cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone is broken and prominent over an exposed wound, then cover that so you can perforate and reduce it with your hands easily and without much extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is beyond your control and the condition of it demands your utmost, then reduce it with your hands using this instrument; an instrument made of metal, whose length is around seven or eight digits, and whose width corresponds to the amount of damage; and for this reason, a physician must have several of these according to what he needs for treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And both should be done with minimal force so that they are not bent or distorted during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of such acute extremity that its margin is in its own extremities; and the upper part of it should extend with great tension, from the middle of it within the folds.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "voluntary hernia lip" in Greek, hence the term 'paleta pauca'.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the purpose that the acute extremity of it be elevated above the extreme end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should be applied at once while the bone returns to its place, and be wrapped with some bandage.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore, you should wrap the extremities of the fracture together, and if the broken extremity is thin and does not take the instrument well for a good grasp, you must then insert the extremity of that bone within the instrument to have it hold firmly.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut open that part which we have mentioned for it, using scissors or saw in whatever way is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then take hold of that which is embedded in the bone, with its rough and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned to its place and the malady finds pain alleviated, you will know that the bone has not yet returned to its natural position; and then do what you have learned to bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, immerse a steril black cloth in vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not place any oily dressing on the wound or other cause that could lead to infection.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply stakes at the appropriate time for the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can incise the tissue with scissors and wrap it according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound toward the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, leading to the patient's death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unhygienic.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the tension is slight, soft, different from the tension of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are afraid of further complications from the ones we have already recommended, and you feel pain in that area, do not press on it, but rather apply this hard bandage made of strong cloth instead of stakes, and tighten it around those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the pain begins to arise, which is born in the joint, then you remove from over it the cloth which you had placed upon that affected part, and soon afterward administer some remedies, such as we usually use to treat pains, thus as with a four-part ointment resembling that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is also necessary that you loosen the crust and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the parts around with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes many days and is not healed nor does the pus leave the joint, then you should know that here are only delays in the healing process, so take care everywhere where the wound tries to form again.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those methods, some separate the dead and remove it, while others, not being able to separate them, place the member in such a way that it causes pain, then pierce and incise according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plague becomes infected or pus forms, it is a sign of inflammation or some other type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each one of these as you deem necessary for the cure of which a description precedes in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning what I must say and you present your case: when the bowels are torn, they protrude over the member as if from the thigh and hip bones and resemble those of the larger members, and do not attempt to attract or extract them under any circumstances, for it often leads to death; after cleansing that space, wait until it heals on its own, which can take a few days or even longer; and tend to the plague if you have observed it, and if not, leave it be.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	**On the Cure for Nodules That Occur at the Site of Any Fracture.**
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motions witnessed cause this misalignment during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it disrupts the natural function of the member; thus, it prohibits the member from performing its natural action.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the misalignment is recent and administer those medicines that have been effective for such cases, including aloe, senna, castor oil, and similar ones; so that you either take some or all of them, and apply those with astringent properties to the misalignment directly, and constrict them firmly around it.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And maintain this tightness for no more than a few days; then release it and repeat the process until the misalignment is remedied; or place a plate of lead on it, as lead has the property to reduce any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the misalignment has already changed to a hard and tight state due to the necessity of keeping it in place, then cut it away from the surrounding tissue, remove any excess or protruding parts, or cut it off at the root until it is remedied; and treat that area once it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture, once it is healed, then the delicate member should be straightened and secured according to its natural shape.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member is straightened and secured, it should not be done except for justifiable reasons: among which one is the lack of solution for the ligament and its attachment not according to what is needed; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or excessive accumulation of fluid; or improper movement at an inappropriate time; or because of stiffness in the blood vessels in the patient's body, and due to frailty in them.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to restrict food for the patient and make their heart tender while the blood clot multiplies in it; and administer baths; and gently massage it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply pressure to the member, so that the pressure draws to it the necessary nutrition or continues the warm humidification with water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the healing of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of covering them is forbidden.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its crookedness and deformity of the broken bone and joint is sought, and this is what gives shape to the member; nevertheless, the member is not forbidden from its natural operation, provided that you receive the approval of one who considers that member newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	There have indeed been many false doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is most reproachable, losing in great fear the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If recent claudication and nodation are present, then it should be treated with a compress soaked in herbal tea containing soothing herbs such as elderflower and ramsone, and also melilot; similar to those used in medicine named "amerans consolidatio".
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent gentle friction, particularly on the wettest parts, and the affected member should be moved through all its ranges at regular intervals.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has progressed and it is severe and curved, becoming a stone and requiring treatment with iron, then you should see that pus has ceased and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised where unnecessary pressure on that part of the body from the bone is relieved, and it is given ease through solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint from its normal position, resulting in a loss of movement and damage to the affected body part, causing severe pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and reduction becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be moved too much or stretched during the period of stiffness, as it causes muscle spasms and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this occurs, you should rest in a splint and immobilize the affected area to prevent further stiffness, then apply hot water and oil to the dislocated joint and gently reduce it.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every part of the body should be treated with this, whose memory will return to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the parts of the dislocated joint as previously described in the fracture; from the upper part of the body, it descends to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both mandibles are dislocated and not treated, the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with little force, and a little fluid is discharged; or they are completely dislocated and swollen to such an extent that saliva from the wound cannot drain, and he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the displacement of a joint is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own without any significant cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the displacement is complete and severe, it is necessary to apply gentle reduction of the joint as soon as possible without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have a firm grip on the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his finger into the gap of the dislocated jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the displacement is on one side; or he inserts two fingers together, if the displacement is on both sides, and all other digits are outside, which equalize; and commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and stabilize them until they return to their proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both can be achieved without delay, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when we return and find them equally engorged, and the opening of the hernia is closed and not softened, then place a layer of cloth over these drape powders, and make it with wax and finely ground oil; and then apply it tightly and easily.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient should sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not strain either to the right or left; and do not force them to do anything; having their food cut into small pieces, until the pains are eased and the jaws are relaxed, then let them eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or coughing, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their proper places, then severe chills and persistent fever occur, and great pain is felt in the patient's belly, and often they vomit clear cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; you will observe many deaths among those to whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	**Chapter 25**
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	**On the Reduction of a Dislocated Furca and the End of a Muscle**
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furca is not dislocated from the thigh inside due to its attachment to the leg; sometimes, however, it is dislocated at the outside joint, and this is evident through sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient remains on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then tighten the area with your palm using a firm pressure, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply pressure over that dressing and poultice and tighten it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of the limb that has suffered the injury should not be displaced; it must be reduced and immobilized as we have mentioned, according to what your equipment allows.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure over that dressing, poultice, and splint, and order the patient to remain still and at rest until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this treatment, the cure involves reducing the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that muscle displacement occurs in three ways, one of which is when it is displaced at the attachment to the bone on both sides.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is displaced at the origin of the muscle, and this requires care; it is not displaced at the rear attachments through the shoulder; and it is not displaced at the front attachments by nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is most commonly displaced and comes out at the attachment on the sides of the bone, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is slightly displaced; but in those with much muscle, it presents more difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from accidents due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of him is torn in pieces like a cauterized scar, and it is separated by what has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then consider that you enter here when you are overstretched by it, and now you proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the muscle fibers are torn; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the intact muscle, as you find great diversity among them; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity where the pain is felt upon touching the head of the muscle like a needle, and the patient cannot move his hand to its original position nor limit its movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the dislocation is in the foot or ankle and you find clear pain upon touching, it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, light reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to its original position; and then he places ties under the pain of it, and raises the joint to its strength in its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then he holds it there so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It is not possible to provide a line-by-line translation without the full context and understanding of the medieval language used in this text. The provided sentence appears to be fragmented and contains grammatical structures and vocabulary that are not entirely clear or consistent with any specific modern language.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is made to lie on their back and rest, with the testicles hanging down, waiting for them to be drawn between relaxation and tension; and the doctor places his foot on the expectation, raises the head of the muscle towards the verture (or: vertically), and pulls the patient's testicles so that they are not damaged by the strain, while another assistant holds the patient's testicles, preventing them from being injured by the strain, for at this point they will return to their place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce this second in this manner: make sure to have present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, then insert your muscle between the testicles and lift the testicles up until they are suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's testicles away from their stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lighter, then be sure to check what other cause might be suspending them, for this will make the dislocation return quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with its head shaped like a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and it is positioned beneath the patient; then, drapes are placed over the head of the stick, and the hernia remains according to the length of the stick, and the doctor's hand is extended to the opposite side, and the patient's body part is pulled from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction is difficult due to any of the causes we have mentioned, then use this remedy: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance between two hands (about four digits) and its thickness should be adjusted according to the form of the hernia.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then, place linen drapes over the head to prevent the stick from causing further harm to the hernia.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then it is paused, leaving the patient's thigh open, and the hand or arm is extended over the thigh within the openings, and the thigh is wrapped over the leg and the end of the arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	It is then paused with the arm over a scale according to its width, and the hand is extended within the openings, and the other part is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can be reached shortly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And once the instrument is inserted according to any method possible, and you notice that you have left the thread of wool from the needle in place, prepare a plaster with powder from a mill mixed with egg albumen over all the muscle, so it is thoroughly wrapped around, and tighten the thread left hanging at the joint; then wrap the ligature over the plaster, attach your hand to the patient's side, and leave it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient's food intake is restricted, as long as the member is supported, for it aids in the healing of the injury.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then gradually increase the food intake and exercise; and if it remains stopped and is not softened, then healing has occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs in it or for another reason, then it should be administered a pointed cautery from three sides, as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are removed from it some times, but it is not fixed and raised, then you know that the nerves in it, which are at the top of the muscle, are already injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is caused, you must place the foot and the ankle or the joints behind, reduction is done with pressure and extension with the hands, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both these strictures should be treated, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes serious in the member and there is delay in its movement, then the illness uses many baths at intervals until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated in all parts, most notably in front of the back part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, it is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover them with blankets, reduce the dislocation as soon as it arrives at the safe cautery, for if you see the cautery safe, reduction is difficult and its healing is not complete; especially when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causes great pain, and many times ends up in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended to two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the physician be on the thigh and beneath him, and he presses the joint with the fingers of his other hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return by bending his hand with his other hand, until it strikes the thigh with the base of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And indeed, two attendants should stretch their arms, and have these two assistants hold this elevation, so that it is not disturbed during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then carefully turn the patient's arms in all directions, since the sheet or bandage is wrapped long around their hand or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it, which helps cause lubrication of the joint and facilitates its return; then gently push the joint back into place until it returns to its original position.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is placed over the pack in which it is compressed and secured with white bandages, and be careful to relax any tightness, lowering the arm from the collarbone and leaving it for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from him and leave it as is.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not too strained, you will repeat the application of the plaster and liniment, leaving it for some days until it is completely healed; then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If due to the gravity of the condition, reduction of the joint is difficult and its disposition is in movement, then administer moisture in a bath and gentle friction, and rest, until it is relieved; or apply heat to the aching joint, if it is a case of stiffened movement; and wrap it up, leaving it on the bone for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then secure that position and immerse the patient in a bath; and when it is dry, rub the joint with gentle friction, repeating the application of heat to the aching joint, if it is stiffened in movement, once, twice, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bath, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and scraped split in the leg's flesh, press and hold it there; do this several times, as that part is moist and will return to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the hand's joint is dislocated and its reduction upon dislocation is easy; conversely, other joints are more difficult to reduce, especially if the location becomes inflamed or develops an abscess after dislocation.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocated joint is that you place the hand's joint from the patient on a table and make them extend their hand, while the physician places his hand or palm over the joint's entrance, and gently pushes it until it returns to its proper location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm of the hand has already been placed on the patient's stomach, then the patient's illness will cause their back to rest against a table in order to achieve extension and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred before to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand from that moment on should be intrinsically over the table so that the doctor's hand can act upon that proximity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if this is done soon, it is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage around them, giving way to the hernia and leaving space for it; and do not focus on this, because otherwise, you will neither suffer nor be able to achieve the reduction of it as days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint should be treated according to its deformity; do not consider the illness as a cause, but rather that the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and it is only by heating them over a cautery near their accommodation and making them firm that you can confer any cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the illness has returned, place your hand on the poultice which we have prepared and leave it there for several days; then loosen it and place it again, and exercise your hand over it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then apply gentle heat and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the Treatment of Dislocations**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the joints are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a digit is dislocated and taken to the back of the hand or the palm, tighten the digit and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns to its position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the head of the bone, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and stretch it until it is correctly aligned on that very day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to this narrative, continue to stretch it as described during the day and exercise movement, and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing, if it is dislocated in the mother's abdomen, hold it as described and perform on it the first surgical operation until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of displaced vertebrae in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae in the back or neck become dislocated, it is a serious condition that requires immediate attention, as the lack of proper treatment can lead to permanent damage and even death.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the indication of this is that the management of the patient's condition is outside their control, and they cannot hold onto it; sometimes the limbs of the body or both legs or both arms become weakened, or a vertebra becomes dislocated, because often times these are broken and require removal from four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, when it is already dislocated from behind and is called gelatinization.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for it is that you must consider whether the gelatinization occurred in childhood, because in such cases, there is neither cure nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Place in that which you see by chance or through percussion or similar to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of cure in lengthy discourse, from which the greatest benefit returns; you have perhaps already been constrained and opened up from that of which there is little excuse due to its excessive use, thanks to my close proximity to my intention, to which I have here exposed and perfected myself from various instruments of which I will now show and spread this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that the inflammation that occurs in the joint area of the foot is neither healing nor cure for that place; similarly, in those that are caused at two joints.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs in the back itself is cured by what you have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is because the disease has spread over its face so that it is equal to a wall, and it has extended beneath him great pain so that his foot cannot be moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a straight stick under them, planted in the ground at the end of the leg around the patient's head, and another stick on either side of their feet at the other end of the leg.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the stick, and it should not be planted in a pit; another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then cover the patient's head and tie their hair with a lion's braid; extend the end of this braid to the stick that is placed at the head, and tie it to it; also tighten the other braid over their hips, supporting their legs, and adjust all the braids, tying them to the other stick which is placed at their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister who lowers the stick should extend the braid to the end of the stick, and neither the sticks nor the braids in their places where they are fixed should be broken, but nonetheless they should not be tightly held as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three arms' length, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is closest to where the illness resides, a place where the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses firmly until the spine is constrained and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open again the space which was closed with the hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground, the patient's head in the last part of the leg two fists long, the length of each fist being one palm, and make a cut in each fist where the blood flows back, and each foot is firmly held on the ground so that there is no more bleeding.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a rod made of wood, in which is a hole, and turn it around in both directions of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a notch in which the rod is formed, its length being equal to a palm where it turns; and the other two rods are similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligatures that you have tied around the patient's foot in the gap where it is supposed to be lifted, and the ligatures that you have tied around their thighs in the turn that is supposed to support their chest.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should have a minister who twists the turn with their hand, and the doctor does the same with the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleansed, you should apply a dry, albumen poultice and cover it; then place a piece of cloth over the poultice from a table whose width is about three times the length of the affected area and its length covers the place of the swelling, and on the end of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then use the remedies we have mentioned, and feed the patient with delicate, nutritious food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and soothe should be administered through table treatment for a long time, which we have recommended; and this has already been applied to that place by means of a lead plate.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there is an imminent danger at the end of the spine joints, caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which you should be particularly careful about, as its strong reaction to this medicine can cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not dislocate except for those who suffer from other joints with slight removal and convexity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: when it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation inward is that when you adjust the leg of the patient according to the healthy side, the affected side becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot in the normal way, and this is where the limb feels a sharp pain from the sudden stretch, thus indicating the point of injury.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation is when parts are displaced outside, as its accidents are contrary to this occurrence.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of one who suffers dislocation in the front parts is that their leg expands completely, but still experiences pain at the site of the injury; if it perforates and cannot return to its place in front, then the patient's urine becomes retained, their testicles are swollen, and they should move the affected leg on a stretcher.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of one who suffers dislocation in the back parts is that they do not expand the affected leg, nor can they bend it where it joins the knee; the affected leg is shorter than the other, the testicles are softened, and the head of the injury points to that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of this dislocation depends on your consideration, for if the dislocation is old and long-standing, having been left untreated by you, then it should be reduced according to its position, but not as a complete cure; thus, it does not make sense to attempt such treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you cut to it when you reduce the joint and extend it in both the internal and external parts, and turn it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the affected side, or use a bandage, or a ligament that is tight over the leg; another minister should extend your hand on top of it so that he places his fingers beneath the patient's thighs; and another person should tighten the ligament at the root of the thigh and hold one end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the leg or the internal part to angle the joint at the fork's position, or from the back part to the front of the hip.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these at once, as long as the patient's illness is elevated to their upper body and the legs hang down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is particularly useful for all four parts.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding their treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the base of the fold in the area between the top of the fold and the place where the hernial sac protrudes; and finally, extend the ligament above the protruding part of the sac to the most superior point of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then, another assistant should strongly grasp the patient's legs, press the swollen area of the hernia, and stretch it outward with force until it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specific type is of lighter cure which reduces this member compared to other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from you and you do not follow the treatment for this type of cure at all, then know that both feet of the patient must be bound together with a strong, light ligature on both the toes and both the soles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of them is measured by a quantity of four times, and the affected leg must be extended more than the other by a quantity of two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is a quantity of two bras.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young person to cut off the top of the hernia, and hang it from another young person, while another young person reduces the hernia with firm pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation in the joint that has come out, take care that the patient maintains pressure with their hands according to what we have recommended regarding the frozen state; and tighten the ligament properly on the affected thigh and on the patient's chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then use two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; place a wet cloth around the middle of the thigh where the hernia is located to prevent damage while the sticks keep the space between the thighs open, so that the hernia's extension to the sides is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant should extend their help, and the doctor with his hand should complete the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow these steps, it will be very effective; otherwise, press diligently on that area as we have said regarding the frozen state with this hand movement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient lies on their back comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then he tightens with his other hand, and at that compression, he returns it to its position between the joints.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not ensure that the patient is extended at the joints, but rather elevated above the ground; once it is paused on a firm surface, if the extent of the dislocation outside the joints is seen, as we said regarding the placement of the body on two joints, and its face and ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be ensured that compression is applied with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, and it extends from the patient's thighs two folds, and when you see those edges and the hernia extrudes its fold and you expand that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and now you adjust two things and place a plaster and remove the bandage so that the width is not damaged in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligament and the plaster, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those edges in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, and remove it according to your initial stretching, and let it go in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then, after that, he should be made to walk slowly for a few days, until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of a dislocated joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	A dislocated joint can occur in three ways: when it is displaced outward, inward, or to the sides, and when it is not displaced forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated joint is that the patient applies their leg to the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of the joint in all ways is to cease the patient's movement directly, so that they extend their leg if possible; hold the patient's thigh with both hands, and place their foot between your feet; then attach the dislocated joint to your palms, and grasp it between your fingers over the patient's joint until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its resolution is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful position.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to hold the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandage.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the affected limb for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer a strong extension to the ligaments whose treatment has been described above in the previous narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (The number xxxiii represents the chapter number, not a translation.)
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus (a bone in the ankle).
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some times the leg is remedied by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation is made either inside or outside the joints.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the leg is that you see the thigh swollen proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation of the leg is by gentle reduction, and it should be extended easily with the hands and then encased until it heals.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the cure of a complete dislocation, it is necessary to cease the harm directly, and have someone strong and brave hold the leg firmly behind at its middle part.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then with your right hand, raise the foot from its superior part, and with your left hand, hold it lower on the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand make two movements downwards, and then extend your left leg; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the right side, while straightening their leg on the left side, this is how the work should be done.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And on the third attempt, gently push the foot of the patient towards the bed, while you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one attempt or two according to this manner, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation over it, for that is how it should be done.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and take a flat stone, and place it firmly on top of them, and compress the hernia between their thighs, and you have already wrapped them up with a cloth so that the hernia does not pop out.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the doctor should hold the patient's legs with one minister, and another should stretch the foot towards its toes or the ligament that lies on the top of the foot; and another minister should stretch it against the extension of its side, and the padding between the thighs of the patient should retain this, so that the weight of the body is not pulled away from the parts below after its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor should re-align the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at the opposite side, so that the dislocation returns to its natural position.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction is successful, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligaments strongly, and bind the foot with ligament to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And take care of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the ligament over them is not strained or harmed strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then place him in this position for two days or three; and if the ligament softens, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third or fourth day, remove that and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to move that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be further damaged and corrupted, and this can prevent healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you apply a hot poultice to an abscess, then follow the treatment methods we have described earlier, in other words, cure and wash it, as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter" in this context, as it is a common heading in medieval treatises.)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When a dislocation is slight, it should be reduced gently; for what is not difficult should be done swiftly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on a bed or a table, and keep it in that position as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you should stand by the foot, place your hand on it to prevent any further movement from the joints, and press gently with the foot until it returns to its normal position, ensuring that the dislocation has been reduced and does not reappear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a board under the foot of the patient that supports the entire foot, with two ends raised slightly, and tighten this structure gently but firmly for three days; afterwards, remove it and make the patient rest from walking for several days until it is completely healed and pain-free.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that occur due to illness, fracture, or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs and you attempt treatment and restoration, frequent consequences lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, it is not appropriate to presumptuously claim expertise in its cure, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, should act tardily, neither too quickly nor arrogantly; and use cautery only when necessary, leaving judgment of illness to divine providence, unless you hope for health from peril, alleviation from malady, and have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, endeavor as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns to its normal position, administer treatment with a warm poultice and care for the affliction using drying ointments as appropriate.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If the dislocation is a fracture and occurs in separately mobile joints, then you should drill through their articulations and do as we have said regarding simple injuries of this type in the places mentioned.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And observe and steer clear, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my instruction; for what is better for you than your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and brings greater health to your true body in due time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, the words of Alcasan (or Albucasim) are perfectly realized, from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Indeed.
