Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Avicenna.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, when you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its purpose it has come to an end, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, I believe you will find great satisfaction in this treatise, which is a part of the most important operation, namely, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, considered the most important operation in our region and in our time, is shrouded in great secrecy, as knowledge of it has declined and only a few brief descriptions can be found in the books of the Ancients, which have led to the development of many errors and misconceptions, as the understanding of its principles is closed, and its power and art are obscured.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I have found it necessary to revive the order of this treatise through a second method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order to include illustrations of cautery tools and other surgical instruments used for the work, as an addition to the explanations, and preparation, which is essential.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why our artful physician does not employ his hand as he should in our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires expertise in anatomy to understand the growth of members and their shapes, the union and separation of them, the knowledge of bones, nerves, and cartilage, and the names of these, and the extraction of them; also of pulsing veins and static ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is misleading, but in practice it is small, especially in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who are ignorant of what we have said about anatomy, it is not to be wondered that they fall into errors from which men may die, as you have seen many such people formed in this science but lacking in true knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You see a foolish doctor who has cut an infected ulcer on the thigh of a woman and cut some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flows inside, causing the woman to die between his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who put his tongue in the mouth of a man who had been biting his teeth, and the tooth was large, and he managed to pull it out with a piece of the jawbone, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already urgently extracted it, and you see that due to the size of the tooth and the state of the patient, you know that he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who was hired by a duke from our land for surgery, and he operated on a black castrated man whose thigh had a fracture; due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with saws and nails with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then, according to their desires, release the tension, relax the muscles, and rest for some days, and command that we loosen the ligament; in this way, too, if the matter is in the feet or the legs, it will heal completely and be cured.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And so, having called upon it and prepared to loosen the ligament, peace is achieved and thus, their pain disappears.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is confirmed in the member and it cannot be restrained, the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until it reaches a dangerous state of illness.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous ulcer, which festers for some days until the malignancy of it grows stronger under its lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the crust of the ulcer is pure melancholy humor; it does not cover that it will reach him through all means, but rather should be in the member which suffers that it should entirely be consumed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation should be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and the other in a deed which is perilous to major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this in every place in this book where operations are spoken of with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard these things and lay down those, so that the ignorant do not take them as a path to speak and slander you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, leave behind terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and set down your weapons of what makes you afraid, so that despair in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains for your glory, and also for the honor of God and after your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Cut open some of their wounds:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad ailments with bad medicines, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter arranged deals with the feet, in the forms of instruments and the tools of cautery, and anything else that is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incision and piercing, and also with cupping glasses, plaisters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all described in detail regarding the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter arranged on internal foot anatomy and the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and acute medicine, and the remembrance of operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it says that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents of it is long and prolix, subtle for knowledge, and secrets concealed; and already many savants have spoken of them, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every general connection universally, which is of matter or its matter, excepting two connections, which are connections with their own matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the connection that is dry and hard with matter, it becomes disordered; for some say that cautery is helpful to such, while others say the contrary, that cautery is not appropriate in illness caused by dryness and hardness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat an illness that is dry and hard with a moist and hot medicine.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the contrary state that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hard illnesses that are found in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the connection of fire, you find the body to be harsh.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And he says, based on the argument of those who hold this view, that he has already discovered this through experience several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate that anyone who has already been trained and practiced in the art of cautery on various parts of the body, who knows the diversity of the composition of humans, the disposition of illnesses within them, the causes of those illnesses, and the circumstances of their occurrence, as well as the passage of time, should come to this.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other cases, there is no cause for fear, especially with dry and hot illnesses, as all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery to treat them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, are superior to medical cauterization, because fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized, without causing pain to other members with its proximity, except for a slight discomfort.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of medicinal cauterization, however, affects distant members and can severely disrupt the healing of a member suffering from a difficult-to-cure illness, and it offers strong aid.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not harm, but only surpasses. It is already known to us through experience and the longevity of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this reason, I excuse the length of my speech. If it were not that I do not wish to reveal the secret fire to you in this brief moment, I would speak at length about its nature in the body and the quality of its operation in expelling illnesses, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that the times of disagreements regarding when to perform cautery and place pads are during the time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by the passage of time is overcome by the healing properties of cautery, and even more so when cautery is for pains or necessary pains, severe and acute, which do not suffer from delay, because it is feared those that come with malice, which is better than allowing further harm to enter over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus, do not rest in your feet, oh sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who cherish such a malady that is cured by cautery; it does not completely disappear, and those consequences persist.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they believe, for cautery is merely a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet doctors may use cautery superfluously over medicine due to the desire for its effectiveness and the power of its operation and the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of their malady, and the effectiveness of it, and what has been prepared within them from the addition of excesses within them, and what has come upon them from their intake of food and similar causes; but the illness on which cautery is administered, if it be a subtle illness in members with few excesses and humors, just as with a tooth cautery for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that that pain may not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is commonly said in popular speech that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is right speech, not to those who do not understand it, for they believe that it is no cure that profits from medicine or any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and I understand that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine not to be when we apply the methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, we administer a cautery, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it follows that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of popular people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only does so in certain bodies, and cauterization on that part is good and better than as they said; nevertheless, when you make a cautery with fire from gold, it is not declared to you, for the gold is consumed according to the amount you want due to the heat of the fire, and if you hold it over the flame, the gold melts into the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman can catch them because of the occupation with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, cauterization with iron must be done more lightly and more precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have ordered those from the head down to the feet, so that I am now asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	With a pointed cautery for head pain caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers a benefit upon the affected area suffering from humidity and cold, which are two causes of severe and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, affecting the head, the parts of the senses (eyes and ears), and also sleep, toothache, and throat pain, as well as any illness that arises from cold, similarly to paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, command the illness to be evacuated using a laxative on the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then he commands them to shave their head, and prepares the surgical instrument between your legs on a clean bench, and places his hands on the patient's feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then he places the razor on the sole of your foot, between your toes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the affected area is in the middle of the foot, mark that place with a try, and then apply the olive-shaped pointed cautery to it.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then he places that on the healthy area marked with a try, in such a way that it descends, causing the patient's hand to be gradually restricted, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then he gently lifts his hand and examines the area, and if you see that the bone is already exposed, along with some amount of pus, he raises his hand again, and if the instrument is not cold, he returns it to that or another place, as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then apply pressure over the infected area at the border, and leave it until the scorch of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a four-part remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens, the more easily the wound heals, so it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that some of them cauterize the bone within the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's nature is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then remove whatever is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that the cautery should be applied to the rear, first strengthening the bone with great effort as it passes through the bone, and this is the shape of the small knife:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that place, the vapours of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and it should be treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not have a clear understanding of these two types of cautery from what I have seen, but according to some people's way of thinking; nevertheless, in my opinion, the best course for health is to follow when it is appropriate; because the head has been exposed through the solution of its continuity as we have witnessed in the other members, and even more so when the nature of the disease is feverish.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that comes first is most effective and best for me; and from that, to that work, for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When a chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head and this prolongs the suffering, it is necessary to use blades, hooks, saws, ointments, poultices, salves, cats, dogs, chickens, and similar remedies, and most importantly, if cautery has already been performed with a tool that does not address any of the underlying causes, consider that the strength of the disease lies in the nature of its head; and if there is no significant heat or inflammation, another cautery should be applied to it slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize it over the edge of his head with a cautery, as long as the wound is open.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the wound and expose the amount of bone we have found, and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the area known as the base, which is where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bone, for the disease finds great pain through it, different from the pain of all other cauterizations on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should perform this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization which treats the horns of the head and the occipital region is a more subtle cauterization than the one performed on the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capital terms.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe pain in the head or a persistent pain within the skull occurs, it is treated with drugs that clarify the head, and other cures, which I have mentioned regarding the deviances of illnesses; and if these do not prove effective, then cauterization on it is performed in two ways: either cauterization with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	You may use cautery or burning medicines that you take a hot iron and scorch it, and amputate the ends of them from both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you incise the painful area in the temple with a scalpel until it is done, leaving the cord intact, as long as it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then you apply a tight bandage to restrict it by gradual constriction, and leave it for three hours; afterward, you remove the bandage, and place the affected area in cold water for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over it until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you apply a cure to it with a poultice until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you find that these methods do not work, consider using some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the two previous treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Prepare the cautery according to this manner: take a hot iron whose shape is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a clave, because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply pressure on the painful area and hold your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood stuck due to the specific condition of the vein is such that it matches the amount of blood, raise your hand so that the artery below is not affected, preventing any flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the area with salt water and place a bandage over it, leaving it for three days; apply plenty of ointment around the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, sharpen the end of the scalpel according to cautery, and be careful not to make an incision into an artery in this newly acquired wound.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ancient wound as we have described in the previous section on treatment and fail to take advantage of the cure, and the disease returns due to lack of light (or proper care), then ignite the cautery knife until it is white hot, indicating its readiness. Place your hand over the area of pain for a moment, making a line along the length of which the greatest part of the pain occurs, or as we say, its focus; and rest your hand for a moment while you make an incision into the arterioles and penetrate within the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the mandible, which is crucial for chewing, and that the wound not adhere and affect the nerves responsible for it, and that no spasms occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is severed, as in the case of its sudden severing, there is fear, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack patience; and let the operation on them begin at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you should recall the regulation of the flow of blood from an accidental artery injury according to its manner in this place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you find that this malady does not respond to the cautery and see that the patient's condition is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery as we have said in the chapter on tightening the bowstring with cauteries that have two blades; this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	**Chapter on Gout**
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When ear pain is caused by a foreign body and is treated with cleansing and other remedies as mentioned in the previous sections, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery, which is known as a "puncta," shaped as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then bring the cautery close to the fire, and rotate it around the entire ear, or in a circular motion if the pain is in any particular area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue applying the heat from the cautery to the affected area little by little until the pain subsides and the spot becomes numb.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with the points is applied all over the ear and some are detached, then treat the areas as they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species that come from flux (venous insufficiency), as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of tortuous vein with pulling and squeezing and no relief is found, know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you burn the tip of the auricle, second, a small part of its temple, and third, the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And hold your cautery in the opposite direction of the diseased part, for the softening is only seen where the part that appears to be healed begins.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you cauterize the affected area with a hot iron directly on the skin, placing it slightly above the affected part of the ear, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the wound is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it is especially from the cutting knife, whose shape is presented in front.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you can see with your own eyes, and take care to avoid any excessive roughness on it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area that is exposed during the process until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Capital VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and its cure does not respond to what has been said, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all the corners of their head; second, at the middle point of the head, as we have mentioned; and third, on the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; it is the last step; and then its cure is in what you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Capital VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization of oblivion done by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	They should be given to the patient at the beginning, large grains and pills that the servants will administer.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely, and place on their chest the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of those methods that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if it is for the good of the patient, do so; otherwise, make three cauterizations to him on the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, he applies pressure to reduce it, and carefully manages the cautery according to the procedure.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you can add more and the patient tolerates it, then perform the cautery in the middle position; and if you need even more, cauterize on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Carefully tend to the area that is healed; and make the cautery olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand that you must proceed in the softening of the head according to what we have said; then carefully shave the patient's head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle position on the head, and cauterize all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the posterior part of it, and cauterize three times on the spinal bones of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of a severe illness that causes stiffness in the body and tolerable ailments, when the pain is intense, use four cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, and later apply cautery until the extreme pain of the patient is relieved, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then take care that it heals properly, and this cautery is olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy is not cauterized, but only that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, we must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning when he has had fever and other cures that we have mentioned in the previous division when the illness is severe and the patient can endure no more medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot endure medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them for several days, as a remedy for the diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery to that place with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occipital region of them, and over any corner of the head that has been cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply cauteries as mentioned above, having a paralytic and soothing effect on the body over the cervical and lumbar spines.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply gentle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted corrupt humors and excessive phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have mentioned in its having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluids declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then it is necessary to give him something that purifies his brain according to what has been previously divided in the treatment.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, then properly make a cut on the circle around it, and then place a bandage over the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel relaxed, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to border before sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that above the fire with a tempered temperature according to measure, which says suffering when it is most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take that in the middle place of his head in the circle, and loosen it within so that it is chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week throughout the entire period until it is healed; or if you wish, make small points with a cautery according to its need, but hold your hand over it as well so that it does not burn too much. This type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then return that limb soaked in hot water or woolen bands.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the draining of water from the swelling.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the onset of water in the swelling is indicated by the signs that I have mentioned in the previous division, then it begins to drain and provide the patient with a drink that purifies the head, and attend to all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And immerse that part in a bath with a degassing agent for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to comb their head, and cauterize that area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize that area with two irons on either temple if it is the onset of water in two swells, or on one side if it is the onset of water in one swell.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left by the chain; and the cauterizes should be on that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see flow of blood from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to have knowledge which is extracted from arteries and amputation of those, and caution against blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes cauterization is performed on the neck, leaving two bones with two cauterizes, thus producing.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are frequent and through veins and arteries which are in the manifest place on the head outside, it is observed that this causes excess fluid in the flaccid muscles, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, cauterize in the middle part of the head and two cauterizations below the temples, and two cauterizations below the cervix between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize it across the entire length of the tail of the intestine at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization of nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating a patient with the condition we have described above and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and make them drink medications for three nights; then shave their head, and cauterize the affected areas with a hot iron cautery or olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply the cautery, striking it twice on both eyelids, leaving a small hair intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to ignite that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the form of this cautery claw is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the mollification of eye lids with cautery.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply the cautery to both eyelids with a small claw in each, extending them from the tempora.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs change to the inside parts and press on the eye, apply the cautery to the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs within the eyelid are pressed against it, applying cautery to the eyelid is done in two manners: either by making a cut or by using a medicinal fire.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you are using fire as cautery, command the patient to open their eyes wide so that all their hairs are exposed, making them long and thin; and if you apply it again later, tighten the eyelids of the patient with a bandage so that the hairs do not grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are clean and washed, place the patient's head on the bed, and gently pull down on the eyelid of their eye, indicating a sign according to the shape of a dead leaf, and it is the beginning of the signal close to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a cold compress or a thick paste of egg white and herbs to the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the hot cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize along the indicated figure, little by little, in repeated motions, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as it was with a leaf of myrtle, entirely visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the patient's recovery is that you see the eyelid of the eye contract and the hairs stand up at the site of the eye's puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then apply pressure to the area at the edge until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with vinegar until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason, and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery on that again just as you initially did.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not smell bad.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicines is what you order for the patient to remove the hairs so that they do not grow back and are healed, and then make a leaf-shaped patch from cloth to cover it.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then apply soap known for its cleansing properties and a living agent, or something similar, and mix those causes well, making it into a paste so that it is not cooled; and spread this over the paper formed like a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both wounds; and leave the fragrant edge dipped in egg albumen, and keep the patient's head in a cool place.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then stop talking about the medicine and apply a small amount, not too much, so that the patient does not feel the sting of the medicine, for its sting is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as you continue to observe the patient's response to the medicine, stop it when the pain from the treatment ceases, and then resume the application of the medicine, washing the wound with water; and consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it should be after being cleaned by fire or an incision, for that is a good sign. If the medicine does not return to the area where it was first applied without causing further irritation, your operation will succeed, and the wound will begin to heal.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to the area until the tension of the adhesion is relieved, and treat it with a healing ointment or other remedies until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to exercise careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if after a few days the eyelid becomes softened due to some cause from the pus in the eye, then apply your medicine again to that place where the eyelid has become softened, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and let it act until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to make the poultice.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and therefore your treatment must be adapted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let the way of treatment not be hidden from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have discussed in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not confer success, then know that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to rest their head on their side, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a small amount of hot wax or a paste of goose grease on the tear duct of the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery whose form is as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, in the shape of a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to get out this way with an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, he who is experienced is better at the work of healing.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the abscess from them.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over it the hot cautery, and with your hand, gently press against the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's pain is not aggravated, and apply the cautery to the edges of the ulcer and burn it away.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply pressure over that area with a border and surround it with an antiseptic ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a strong corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and cut according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	There is another way to treat a fistula, which some masters mentioned first: enter the place of the fistula and clean it, then apply pressure on that small fissure whose form is thus: and pour into it as much melted lead as necessary; hold your hand with good tension, avoiding any harm to the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the wound; and cover the part where you are applying pressure over the patient's wound with a cloth soaked in honey or water, so that the lead hardens on the fistula and heals it by extraordinary means.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a drain from the nose and return the fistula to its place in the nose as it should be.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of Hernia**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequent accidents cause fissures in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not profit from your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a knife as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and the cavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that dressings while it is still fresh.
Capitol .xix.	**Capitol XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of the uvula, the palate, or the teeth roots, bleeding occurs and it does not stop, and a fistula forms, and you do not treat it properly, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and insert that flame into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand, gently guide the burning tip until it reaches the depth, and repeat this once or twice; and take care of the dressing as we have said for the healing process.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is incised and cleaned, it is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX.**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of vessels.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the vessels are softened by moisture and the teeth are loosened, and treatment with medicines does not help, then place the patient's head on the affected area, and shape the cautery so that it approaches the tooth, but do not press too hard so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being treated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient gargle with salt water and do this for an hour, then stop it, because the loosened tooth will be firmly set, the softened gums will tighten, and the moistened humors will dry out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	About the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either with a cow's hoof cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a cow's hoof involves taking the hoof of a cow and piercing it in the fire until it becomes hot, then handling it carefully, wrapping it over the affected tooth, and pressing it against the aching tooth until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip some cloth or cotton in the wound on top of the tooth, place that over the painful spot, and place the heated iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization only applies to external wounds or cuts, and it should not be too severe nor should the heat of the fire reach the hernia's opening.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery to fit, place it over the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may return either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that, with urgency in preparing the cautery, the patient opens their mouth well and holds it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply a cautery where you have made an incision as best as you can.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophy is caused by fluid and humors that do not obey digestion due to medicines, and you need to force them slightly, then apply the cautery flame according to this form, having two sharp ends so that the smoke goes up from one end, and pause the ignited flame on the affected area once, and repeat if needed until it reaches the depth of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then pause the cautery according to the size of the apostema, and wrap it tightly for three days, pausing to apply a cool compress to the affected area until any remaining burn has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or pointed cautery is used in this manner.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of raw wounds and the constriction of arteries.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the lung's surface and particularly when it is chilled by contact, one must understand that this illness needs to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to penetrate the gullet with the cautery nor inflame the patient's bowels, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area or another cautery as needed on the joint of the neck in the last spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of him is fastened in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply care to that as previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for lung diseases and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung diseases are caused by excessive humidity, and the patient has no fever or sputum, and it is an old condition, then cauterize with two cauteries on the furcula in the areas where the lungs are congested and painful; and another cautery at the mid-point of the foot between the big toe and the second toe; and fasten the cautery as previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make punctures within these; and then carefully treat that with the medicines that are mentioned, before it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three points for cauterization, and it is done in this way: once you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the titillary (veins) which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humidity and it does not stop at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it is in its usual place, and then gently move it back as we have witnessed; first reduce the dislocation, and then have the patient lie on their back or side; and raise the knee that was affected by the dislocation, placing it above the hip joint using your left hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two ends; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the opening through which that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will be seen when two cautery ends are used.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so it is subtle according to the quantity of trial; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this rule, and that is the reason for the cauterizations. VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and the member will not be harmed for any length of time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then this should be done, cauterizing over the muscle with a heated cautery claw or with pointed cautery points, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Capitol .xxvi.**
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When stomach pain arises with inflammation and increases the space within it, and if you continue treatment methods without considering, soon you will see that the illness will shift to the patient's back, expanding their muscles and bones, and cauterize that area with three cauterizations: one leaving a mark on the foot with the size of a finger as a cautery claw, and two others on either side of the costae of the cautery, forming a triangular cautery shape; stretch between those not properly aligned, which will cause corrosion.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach following this form; and this should be a circular cautery as per this diagram.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in the part that is frightened of this cautery: and you know how much puncture you want to apply over the stomach, then cauterize it with cautery on these points; and take care of the treatment as the cure has been preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of the Varicose Vein**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein ends due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind, and before its abnormal condition is worsened by excess fluid, the treatment for this illness is as we have mentioned, not as others prescribe. Then, the patient should be placed with their neck raised, and three cauterizations should be applied according to this form and with this amount over the vein below the hip bones, which brings about the recumbent position of the man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not cut the cautery with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of this (substance) adheres to the quantity of the nature of the cord, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient's pain is in their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their things and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when it is suitable for your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and focus the gaze of all present so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the bowel here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is in the flesh or around it, if it is in the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on a serious gravity and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is around the flesh of the leg, because the pain is very intense and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is exposed; then identify the location of the abscess; and apply the pointed cautery, whose shape was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with those cauterizing irons until all the wound is closed, so that it heals properly.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care for the cure of other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And be aware that this form of cauterization should only be practiced by those who have studied medicine and are well-versed in it; indeed, many ailments can be caused by imprudent use of such methods, but for those who follow the rules, it is safer.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient methods of cauterization for pleurisy, according to this practice, involve taking the long, thin blade of an old-style scalpel and making a single cut with it, of appropriate thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse those in oil and heat those over fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizations below, slightly declining from the part where the beard is, and two cauterizations declining between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly declining towards the back parts; another cauterization in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations in the back parts; and one cauterization in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the foot, leaving the cauterization between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area while the procedure is in progress.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	They also speak of other ancient practices that involve the use of hot iron cautery, resembling a ray and igniting it, and placing this in the space between the ribs, to reach and heal that place, as we have said about the hernia.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	One should not fear this incision with cautery, as it often happens in the fistulous place where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	It appears that the text fragment you've provided does not contain meaningful content related to the previous medical treatise. The notation "Capitol .xxx." suggests a section heading or a book chapter, but without additional context or content, it is difficult to provide a translation or interpretation. If you have more text or context, I would be happy to assist further.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	# Cauterization of the Melsa
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the gums with the method we have described for treatment in the division and you do not apply your care, use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one being that you make three or four incisions according to the length of the gum as per the shape of the cautery marks on the tissue.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the manner we have described for the cautery marks on the tissue overall.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand against the cautery; and the illness should be on its side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you light the cautery with two directions, which we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and raise the cord that is on the straight part of the gum where it rests on the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the body according to its length, so that cauterization is done according to the part of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then carefully insert two instruments, with fire, into the opening through which the chain from the other side penetrates.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterization; and thus four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you should take care of the cauterizations so that they do not become gangrenous for many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but directly to the affected limb.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating dropsy using the methods described above and your treatment does not improve the condition, you should apply four cauterizations in a circular pattern around the affected area, as well as one cautery on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the shin, two between the spinal bones of the back, and one at the right side of the foot, and yet another cautery over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then carefully apply the cautery so that it burns deeply for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the illness from treatment with cautery alone, as it should be combined with two intentions, and it will be celebrated with aid for healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery instrument to be used for the stomach should be a claw according to the shape required, and it is that which is used to cauterize the back is olive-shaped as per its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and other parts.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in warm water and become filled with water (presumably referring to swelling or edema), cauterize the top of the foot between the big toe and the little finger on the foot without touching the bone, and do not twist the cautery; then lift your hand above the foot and do not return it until the saturated water has drained.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is done in this manner: Near both thighs, place two cauterizing instruments, and on each thigh, make a cut with the tip of the cutting edge of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one leaves the sharp end up and the other down at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizing instruments.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then attend to those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter XXXIII** (Note: The exact content of this chapter cannot be inferred without the full context of the treatise. This heading simply indicates the beginning of a new chapter.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts** (Guessed section title based on context)
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to friction and humidity that clears the channels, it is the digestive and retentive virtue located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with curative methods, and do not provide relief, sometimes the patient suffers from gouty heat that exhibits virtue, then cauterize that with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with circular cauteries and four cauteries in the circuit of subtle humors, with a fine-pointed cautery; and with cauteries on the alkalines over great aloes, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity bursts forth and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the penis and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure for young age from which one does not stray.
Capitol .xxxiv.	**Chapter .XXXIV.**
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When hemorrhoids, either old and derived from thick humors or corrupt due to moisture, are not healed by the methods mentioned in the previous sections, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the pus left on the small of the back in a small triangular shape, and apply a cautery above the navel for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is observed that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned previously; also apply a cautery to the femur, and another cautery to the patient's tongue using a clavicle cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of hernias, it is appropriate to perform excision of them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise hernias, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert that ignited instrument into the excised hernia, and secure your hand over it so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply ointment to them until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the passages of the intestine.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, then it is healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupt with infected humidity, it is most worthy to attempt its healing subtly, and then you should consider the amount of depth of the fistula according to the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Return the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then take that ignited cautery and insert it into this fistula, according to the amount in which the attempt intertwines.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this cauterization until those corrupted bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if there is a fistula in the bladder or intestinal cavity, be cautious of all these places; and do not attempt this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you believe it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the matter that caused it has been removed, and it heals in this way for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not from within the body, then know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the organ, or it falls because of those causes from which there will be a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, you should cauterize those over the ulcers with a cautery over each ulcer, using a clava from which the memory of the pain is extracted.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should strongly cauterize it according to a small gap, so that three cauterizations will come in line, and thus they will be less frequent in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the opening where the discharge leaves the bladder; the hairs of the penis begin at this point, and cauterize with a cautery on both the right and left sides.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery at the lower part of the back, or two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be driven according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the breast becomes inflamed and moist, which prevents conception, corrupts a woman's menstruation, delays her menses, and causes pain during their flow, then know that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder; or two cauteries, driven deeply, and let them be well-fixed.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucous membranes are infiltrated at the joint of the ankle, and this causes displacement of its parts, a sign of it is that the affected side remains prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is obstructed with some hard object.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle with a circular cautery, because you have already tried to reduce it by moving the joint in a circle, and thus the dislocation falls into its proper place within the ring.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above has the same form as the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the wound; and take care that what is healed be properly cared for.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower part of the body, caused by cold, wetness, and inflammation, the patient is treated with the methods we have mentioned, and these are ancient practices. Then you should remove the thick humors from the body using foul pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery on that part follows two ways: either with cauterizing medications that burn, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two knowledgeable methods, of which one is to cauterize that over the opening of the hernia with three triangular cauterizes according to this form; and make them as deeply as possible.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterize should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	In some cases, the cauterizes may be placed over the mid-section on the hernia's head, making it four in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape precedes in the cauterization of the hernia's displacement, one that is a containing circle and burns away the stiffness of all the ligaments.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in this case when the pain is localized to the hernia and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended inside the thigh, then cauterize that place with two cautery irons over the affected area where the pain is located; and place a cautery on the ankle for four days, slightly to the outer side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the condition.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the condition causes pain to spread to the nearby areas of the feet, then cauterize that place with an iron having three, four, or more points, as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the condition causes pain to remain in the thigh after movement, then cauterize that place with a cutaneous cautery iron.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not sever nerves or cause great damage, and through this, the condition is relieved without harm or constriction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those which will be cauterized over the bone and finished in the cauterization process, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reaches the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then I apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and thus I bring about death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its point should be as thick as a date palm bone or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, another third should be made; and the space between them is the width of a night's rest; and those circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those lines is one or two nights, and make on the edge of those iron circles a proper dressing in the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Near the fire, it is lit so that it may heat and give off sparks, and then it is placed over the water's edge, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so it is cauterized with three pointed cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then it is left like that for three days; the wound is dressed with a border and left open for too many days; and the treatment continues until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few of us have found those that regard it favourably.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	One may use the best cautery on him who suffers greatly, and find comfort in the place of his pain.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Perhaps the text is describing a surgical procedure:
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part, they should be opened from above and below, and placed so as to hold each other in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the part where the patient feels pain in their side, and take some cold water, forming it into two circles, and applying it gradually to that area for an hour; and as the patient endures the biting and tightening (as if from fire) of the pain, until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand holding the instrument, and remove the cold water from all parts of the affected area with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then apply this for three days, and place your hand over the affected area until the swelling returns to its original state, and repeat this for some more days, and it will prevent future occurrences; this is the best course of action for young people.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then attend to that wound until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is widespread in the thigh or leg, make him lie down with his affected part raised as if he were lying in water according to what is done in equal amounts of water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a mixture of alkali and the cause of both parts, then press them and place them in a new wave from which the opening is perforated with a small tool according to the quantity that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then place the bottom of the wave over another wave in which you have immersed the alkali and causes of warm water for two fingers, and afterward, compress them with your hand over the tieua (presumably a type of material or tool) tightly, and allow the hot water from the alkali to descend into the opening left by the cold water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then carefully adjust all that water, and mix it with another living cause and other renewable alkalis, so that it becomes a strong, sharp liquid, which is administered in most medical operations and the cauterization of other members, for operation uses fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among these medicines are some that use cauterization, with quick and powerful herbs and substances that cause a burning sensation, so they are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	An ancient man describes an operation and cure for pain in the knees and sciatica, and marvels greatly at its effectiveness, saying that no other treatment is needed, as it heals completely with a single application, when one immerses oneself in hot water and rests immediately from that moment.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It is that one should use fresh parsley from a certain plant, and if it is not available, take a recent fig; twist it slightly with some salt and place it in the water where the pain is, or on the affected area, or on the leg, and let it be.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the pain requires adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in water and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert the hot (object) into the sole, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that no one should use cautery with these treatments unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the narrow vein of a goat is cauterized, it helps the animal; and the cautery should be applied to them in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the foot's toes and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dry goat's vein and apply it to the fire until it becomes charred; then place it on the wool and leave it inside until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears in the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the "cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is felt in the back for various reasons, such as strain or injury, or due to excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not apply to any other species but this one which is caused by the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, for the evacuation of the malady, make pills that resemble them, which are to be administered on both sides where the pain is located three lines according to its extent, as you have applied ten in each line with cautery or more, according to the quantity that corresponds to the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the remedy.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This malady often manifests in young children; and the sign of its onset in children is that their small bodies become stiff in the evening, hindering their elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last spine of the back and the nodes of the spine that already begin to rise above the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and want to prevent it, cauterize that part with a circular cautery in this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over all parts of the spine evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be proper among them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then carefully tend to the area as it heals, as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not applied to a wound caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus gout caused by cold, when not cured by treatment and the pain persists, then the application of heat cautery is used.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize the immediate evacuation in the joint circuit of the foot using fire cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take a olive-shaped cautery whose form is thus:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints, and this persists, then cauterize each toe with three or four of these olive-shaped cauteries.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize and do not press too hard with the cautery, just touch the specific area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain is within the toe and spreads, then administer the cauteries as we have said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the feet, it is called gout, then make points along the course of the tendons as they bend, in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these joints, make points along the course of the tendons on each side and on the pinched nerve of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can also affect the joints or muscles, then cauterize the various parts of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the disease without proper treatment and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is removed with this cautery, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a section header or title, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the angles and hernia protrudes from the abdomen, then it is necessary to begin by returning the intestine to its cavity, and you must ensure that the patient abstains from strenuous activity on that day and uses gentle remedies so that the opening in their stomach heals.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue to support the patient with your hands on their back, and instruct them to keep their breath relaxed as the hernia or pain appears or disappears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the hernia to its original position and, after attempting to open the rupture on the bone of the penis, mark the end of it, which should resemble a circle in the upward movements of the body's joints.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery whose form is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which a hot and moist wound lies.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand, using cautery tools straight, and aim between the bones of the thigh within the middle of the muscle; repeat that another time if you have not achieved it on the first attempt between the bones.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the position of the hernia during the cauterization, that you do not burn the hernia so that it does not lead to death or other great harm on top of the illness.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not apply your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery on children should be subtle according to their size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care of the cautery site for three days, applying cold compresses until the burn from the fire scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the site is sealed and the plague is gone.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care to give them no food according to the duration of their healing, as it weakens their stomach, and ensure that the hernia does not protrude due to efforts to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, when it is desired to raise it after approximately ten days, administer a suitable remedy and maintain that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And also reduce work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be restored to health.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, at the very beginning, and so that they do not reopen, cauterize the rupture with a red hot iron according to its size, and it is this same fluid that is expelled from the intestines; then care for that as we have said, and do not allow it to recur.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have previously said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, as it is recognized by trial.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that they hold in the width on both sides of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	**Capitol .XLVI.** (The number XLVI represents the Roman numeral for 46)
De cauterizacio de torcio.	**On the Cauterization of Twists**
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in various members due to injury or impact and continues for a long time without responding to medical treatments, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the type of cautery should be for each member according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, well; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for it is common with those pains that they are punctured from one member to another close to it, so be sure to obtain these pointed cauteries until the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprosy patients sometimes require cautery for severe damage, albeit rarely if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is severe and has not been cured by what we have said in the division, and do not delay, nor hesitate, and be wary of the illness that corruption may encompass all of him and all of his integrity; then cauterize it on the head with a cautery: at the middle point of the head, and at the second place beneath it, spread the front to the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, over the nape or serve it.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly, apply the heat of the cautery slightly within, pressing upon the bone a slight pressure, to dislodge the clots, so that the expulsion of thick vapours is relieved; and cauterize over the wound as required.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize with those cautery tools we have mentioned at the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each eyelid, and two cauteries on both sides of the spine at the nape of the neck, and six cauteries on the spinal columns, and one great cautery near the coccyx, and one on the hip bone, and two on each thigh, and one on each leg, and two on each arm, and two on each muscle, and cauterize the tender parts of their feet; and cauterize all the joints of their hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on the sole of their feet, and on the heel.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which are on the foot, do not irritate them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, it is cauterized with a hot iron over the bone of the thigh, and others over the opening of the stomach, and others on the colon.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more precise the cauterization, the greater its effectiveness and the less painful it is for the patient; thus, since the body is already numbed, the pain from the cautery is minimal.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take care that the cauteries be of appropriate size, great or small, according to the members and joints as previously described with respect to the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then, take care of the cauterized areas with honey mixed with flour, and other remedies internally until they are healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization of faints.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stunned or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but is still not healed, then you cauterize that stunned member with a hot iron according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the hot iron should enter slightly into the depth of the flesh.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that, so it heals properly.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes faints are cauterized from the head down to the hands and feet, and along the spine and when the nerves of that member feel pain, then the faint is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not press upon it unless one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of nerves throughout the body moves it.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When hemorrhoids are old and do not respond to any of the usual medical treatments, then cauterize them with a cautery point, according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord within, until the white and color of it are reduced, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a mixture of flour from erg and lentils with warmed oil and leaves of arnot grass, or pigeon's blood or goose blood, each in its own portion and all mixed together, and apply it as a compress to the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter One.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of cracks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and it desires to spread, cauterize it with a circular cautery along its course as it spreads.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the learned say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the course; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may be an ulcer, and I have seen this a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more advisable to cauterize it along the course of the disease with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess takes too long to mature, this is due to excess fluid, the state of illness, since it is old and brittle with little strength, or time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with a number of small pointed cauteries; and apply pressure so that it will mature faster.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make an incision in the abscess with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and stop it in the middle of the abscess until the wire penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is made at that place which is infected, in order that the body of the arm be relieved; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii. (This appears to be a section header or title, indicating the start of a new topic within the treatise.)
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption of the member, which corrodes it as if fire were consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you encounter that corrosion in a place where cauterization with fire is necessary, then use hot clamps, small or large as appropriate for the location of the corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it completely until you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then bandage it for three days, and apply oil mixed with herbs continually over the cauterized areas until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then care for it using poultices of fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If the flesh becomes healthy after three days without corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some times acute medicine, because it is half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is better to remove the leucocit (white blood cell) immediately.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have any inclination towards it.
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter III**
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Joints and Similar Conditions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The visible lumps in the parts around the foot affected by illness, which is called a 'claw', are caused by a severe, penetrating condition that affects the foot; and treatments for these include cauterization with fire or with water-cooled cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization with fire involves creating a burning instrument shaped like a twist of thread, made of iron according to the size of the lump, and having thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then apply the burning instrument to the lump, and carefully rotate the cautery around the lump until it reaches the depth of the lump.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a paste made from dried herbs mixed with salt to the affected area, and leave it for one night so that it can eliminate the root of the problem.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a healing ointment made from natural meat until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If these measures do not help and the pain appears on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must administer to those cauterizations with hot water, and take a small metal needle or a sharp instrument, place it over the joint, and pour a few drops of hot water into the needle; hold your hand over it, compressing it completely, and repeatedly move the edge of the needle along the joint's base until the hot water is completely drained; wait for the patient to feel the burn from the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, as the joint's heat will have dissipated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And also, for those who have these issues, it is important to ensure that all of them are treated.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And also, treat the abscesses that form around the joint's roots with antiseptic ointments as the flesh regenerates.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any tremor caused by friction on the nerves or by fever resulting from such friction, or for other similar reasons, you should apply four small cauterizations with a hot iron to each vertebra of the back, between each vertebrae applying one cauterization; also apply cauterizations to the patient's feet, and over their stomach with olive cauterizations.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient should cease, hastening the healing of the afflicted disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white patches appear, and pustules open up that are formed from corrupt gross matter; then at the beginning with appearance, cauterize over every part of the fistula with a delicate cautery or a hot iron, whose tip is dipped in fire; or cut with a long scalpel; or cauterize with a lenticular.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cauterization is also performed at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they are not crusted, and the excess matter is removed, doing those, and healing from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is important to ensure that this is done with the proper evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flu (or venous congestion) caused by an accidental wound through an incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many observed signs must flow from the arrowhead that pierces the wound which should be cleaned, or from the beginning of abscesses or cauterization on a limb, and then it seems similar, and it is difficult to retain this.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So if this happens to anyone, you must hold the wound with your hand at the orifice of the arrow's impact, and place a cushion over it, keeping in mind that you should stop the flow of blood as soon as possible so that it does not gush out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply olive oil cauteries, both small and large, in many places, and blow over them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large one according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, pouring boiling poultice on it as you have previously cleansed the area, and cauterize it until the blood flow is stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you remove your hand and withdraw the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to repeat this until the bleeding stops.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to injure the nerves here, which may lead to further complications for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are burnt, the bleeding is restricted, or by binding it tightly with string or ligature, or by pausing over it medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tightened at the anus or genitals with proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a moderate restriction of movement to the patient, with compression by means of bandages or due to concurrent causes and similar conditions, should only do so temporarily.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for anyone and not in the presence of a doctor or medicine, then open at the indicated site on the vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood flow is stopped from the sovereign cause of the illness; and on the swelling, it should not be rubbed; and rather, pour cold, wrung water within until the swelling is frozen and thickened; and then consider what cautery or medicine is required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second step.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, ventilation, phlebotomy, wounds, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter, we have discussed all manner of illness in which cauterization with fire is appropriate, both medicinally and through burning, along with their occurrences and causes, and the tools required for such as described in the forms of the cautery. I have organized the chapters ascending from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, we shall proceed in this manner, so that anyone desiring it may find relief, as much as possible on the subject of which he has inquired.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin, understand that this chapter is for those who have learned in the first chapter about cauterization from fear.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you should be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, one can observe sudden effusion of blood, which is dangerous to life, you must apply the vein or make an incision over the abscess, or perceive the discharge, or clean the wound, or extract the arrow, or begin the treatment of stone and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all of these, fear and trembling accompany them, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it does not fall on you in which there is a situation, because sometimes you must take the ways of men as the ways of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, some will go to their disease and despite all efforts, death will be denied to them; thus, because of the violence of what he finds in his illness, and due to the longevity of his illness, fear of the disease which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of these, he who gives you hope and confidence in health, for his disease is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore, do not be deceived by those who come to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than their knowledge and their greed; and do not presume any cause about it except for certain knowledge that proves what they tell you, and which has received praise in its success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients, from diagnosis and indication of that which brings health, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, my sons, may God inspire your understanding and do not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this distinct chapter according to the preceding chapter on cautery, from the care of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in what you inquire about and of which you stand in need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness often affects children, starting during childbirth and when the darkness enters the child's head, its vitality is affected.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times it appears for a hidden cause that is not obvious.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This disease is often seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have witnessed great damage done to them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus enlarged so that he could not lay down on his side because of the great size of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased until death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skin and bone or is added beneath the bones on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that one, if the humidity is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure in the length, and the width of the fissure should be two finger-widths so that the humidity can drain, and this is the shape of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity remains between the bones, it is a sign that you must open the compartments of the head completely and the water is squeezed out when you press with your hand on the soft parts inside, but it is not something you should hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make an incision in the middle part of the head, which has three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract the incision to remove all humidity; tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters; drill into the affected area with a needle and pour wine and oil over it within five days, then loosen the lint and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and hold the head at an equal level; feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another incision technique that you consider based on the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay close attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and act accordingly as best as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for a steady flow of blood and stop the patient's suffering through the evacuation of humors.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries that are close to auricles, called *hilasseysse*.
Capitol segon.	**Chapter Two.**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an unexpected or severe condition in the hands or feet, and this is old and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final remedy is to incise those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus you should cover when you want to incise where the malady has raised its head, and then rub the area with rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and tighten the collar of the malady with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each over the areas that are appropriately dilated, and they remain concealed in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then you should focus on the artery with a probe, and incise each one with the sharp edge of the knife as you make your incision towards the bone, and this is according to the extent of the head's size.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the probe between the artery and cut it at the points of your incisions on it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be such that if any vein is incised, the blood flow is stopped from escaping through frequent pulsations.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the waistline, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then gently insert and try it within the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you must get from the wound is a quantity of wine one (unit), and readily draw out no more or less, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the illness and the extent of the arrow in the body.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then consider the plague, and if any cause of the infection remains on the bone, immediately cut it off to prevent the spread of gangrene.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the plague with plasters and bandages of linen, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From extraction of the arteriies which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or recent migraine occurs due to a cold and moist atmosphere and the quality of the tears in the temples, or an old and violent one that resembles those mentioned earlier, and it is not alleviated by medical treatments and we have resorted to these maladies, then we extract the arteries in the temples or cauterize them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of performing and extracting those is to target the pain that originates in the temples; understand the artery visible in the temple where it is indicated by its pulse, and it is hidden from most people due to its violence.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the pain with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you feel the artery manifest.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge that has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the cord as easily as possible to reach the wound; and take off the clothes on top and extract the foreign body from the wound, uncovering that of the tunic that is left behind, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you wrap it at the end of the finger, and cut off a part according to the amount by which its extremities are stretched and contracted, and it will not allow blood flow if not cut through; otherwise, the blood will not stop from flowing out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then empty the vein of blood within three beats.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is large, then you cover it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or twine, and do not let it putrefy before the healing of the sore, and allow blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; do this at that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it after they have been cut, and hold in place that piece of work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or there is a complex warming; for cauterization is of those causes that aid in ending humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the ribs that have moved to a new location, and place them properly over it, carefully making sure they are not damaged, and treat with dry medicines to make the flesh and bones heal within a short time.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time bleeding from the rib occurs, then you must constrict that blood flow, either with a cautery or something you place in the socket of the rib, and tighten your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present, then apply your touch to the spot until the swelling is reduced, and pierce the spot with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and tighten according as it suits.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more lightly extracted from archery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, having already felt both spots, and ignite some, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, as it is not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both edges is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better with just one edge, as if it is very sharp with two edges close to each other, it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, the heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is slightly separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best of all works and is most easily performed.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two bones is determined by the amount of swelling in that area.
Capitol quart.	Final stage.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic heart conditions in the chest.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acute conditions with acidic tears, affecting the veins just above the temple on the forehead, and no medical cause can be determined for this, the patient's face may appear reddened and their movements will be as if they were being affected by ants, and their eyes are exhausted, moist to the point that their eyelashes become uncomfortably sticky, and their eyelids scalded due to the intensity of the tears. The traditional remedies used in treating such conditions in this operation include those methods which are most vigorous.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And so you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead evenly spaced according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally spaced to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears, which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful with the incision of the arteries, which are in two cuts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And the space of each incision should be adjusted to about three fingers' width.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife between the two acute ends, which is the form of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is taken out of the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove entirely the cord that is between two incisions on the hip bone, and then make this cut in the middle of the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then take this knife and insert it into the first incision, another time using a different tool called a scalpel, which is sharp on one side and not on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the cord, and the blunter edge against the bone, and use it to reach the middle of the fissure, and sever all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appear of the cord, and then make it in the middle crack between the other cracks.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the veins.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each crack some warm wool, and press upon those powders coated with wine and oil, and it is important that it does not develop an infection cautely.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then apply care to it with basilic ointment or rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	The title seems to be incomplete or missing some context. It appears to be the word "Capitol" followed by a period and a letter 'v'. To provide a meaningful translation or interpretation, more text would be required. The term "Capitol" likely refers to a place name, possibly related to a capital city, but without additional context, it's challenging to offer a precise translation.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding from catarrh and the descent of fluids from the head's cavities.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is sudden, severe bleeding and the patient's wounds from the disease are extremely small, and upon examining them, their paleness and hair loss become evident, and in the region of the head, sharp pain and the resulting discharge occur, then you know that this condition arises from veins that have burst from within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to wash their face, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and with your hand remove the blood from around the teeth, which is more beneficial after mastication). Until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the pus with sponge or clean cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the wound with very thin strips of new cloth or bandages.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a fresh poultice soaked in vinegar and oil to prevent the risk of infection.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen it and see that the infection has decreased, then rub the bone where it begins in the living flesh, and apply a dry poultice made from two parts of flour and four parts of colchicum, as if you were to make a paste, and administer it to these wounds, both on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what cats have in their ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that cats have in their ears is one of four types: it may be a hard mineral or something similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or it could be from plants like chickpeas or fava beans, or fluid-related, such as water mixed with vinegar and similar substances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a cat or other similar cause appears in the ear due to any reason that does not adjust or adhere to the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the pain persists, it distills into some cause of infected oil or mucus, then administer the extraction of it, and make it sneeze in a suitable condition, and support the nose to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then hold the ear canal with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear away from the parts above it, for these motives are often forgotten due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a delicate epichirurgic forceps, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the forceps, then use these; and if not, administer the extraction of it with a very thin instrument with a slight bend.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of thread and insert the end of the cannula into the canal of the ear, sealing around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that only the cannula opens.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the small wind with great force, as we have seen.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot metal or some kind of heated apparatus with which the outer shell of the object is carefully wrapped at its tip.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the canal of the ear with ease and remove the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten with all the causes we have seen, then tie off that which causes abscess or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of dissection is that you begin by cauterizing the affliction in the saphenous vein and extract the clot according to the virtue of the wound, then make an incision between your fingers and convert the edge towards the openings from which it came, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the thick part of it was previously pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure resembles a crescent moon and reaches the base of the finger, and once the nail is observed, you can use appropriate instruments; then immediately apply pressure to the fissure with great speed and treat it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the nail is one of the inflamed and swollen substances, then administer treatment and extract it; however, if you do not obey my instruction, then take some fine sponge and use it according to this method:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and apply that for the removal of the fallen substance from the nail.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think that the part is already moistened by the heat of the body, stop it with heavy weights, and extract it gently from its position or with a subtle gesture, or by incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that enters the ear, consider how this condition begins with sneezing and fills the ear with some old or young wax, then pour over the ear in which the water is located, and if it is expelled through that opening, it is good; otherwise, take a few hot stones from the fire, slightly warm them, and the patient should insert one of those into the canal of his ear and jump on one foot, pressing hard with the other stone on the stone next to the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And water should be drawn as you would from a paper or cloth container, place one end in the ear and extend the other end over the fire until the whole of it is burned away.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then place another cloth over it and do this several times until all the water is drawn out, and tear that from the cannula as is usually done with the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body from the ear, if it is small and resembles one another, treat it as we have said in division; but if it is a large object which causes an appearance at the sense of the disease, then administer the extraction of it by gesture and incision, and the cause of it is usually lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of worms grown in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in division and in the distillation treatment and do not agree with your care, then watch that you protect the ear from sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus, if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with your fingers or some subtle tools, but if no cause is apparent, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which is the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the very fine end into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the illness; and then suck with a strong suction, making movements as you do so, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not follow these instructions, then heat and close the tube in the manner as we have said; administer distilleries which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the section on distillation treatments.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your pouring of medicinal oils into the ear should be done with this instrument, which has this form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make a small, narrow incision, leaving it open, and apply a bandage over it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is with the use of something that is in the cavity of the container here, it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it at the decent end, then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing or any herbal juice or whatever you prefer from these medicines in the canula — in the ear —, and then insert the ray near the edge and squeeze with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels relief within.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should already be scorched with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too harsh, because the ear medications do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear inflammation.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, children's bellies may swell without any apparent reason, and this also happens to some adults; inflammation in the flesh of the ear due to an infection or some other flesh damage; and this inflammation may be internal or external.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that occurs in the internal part, which does not understand the cause, is in the most difficult situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where you can see the cause, take the patient's ear to the sun and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see inflammation appearing, open that with a fine, sharp instrument from which this form comes:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the limb in which the tightness is felt has one part sharp and the other not, and the knife's edge is of two lengths to prevent it from cutting into the skin.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the incision is for a bone lodged in the ear or in the flesh, then you make subtle cuts and carefully incise until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the incision is in the root of the ear, take a fine blade and heat it slightly with fire, then gently insert it into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you sense an obstruction that the patient finds easy to expel due to its severity, exert pressure on it to facilitate its release; but be careful not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then wrap the ear with a cloth according to the amount of space in which you have applied the Egyptian ointment, and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or soak it in water and pour that onto the affected area after drying it, then use another cloth. If the ear has already formed a crust, be careful not to destroy it and replace the cloth with one dipped in oil, as long as the infection shows signs of improving; and tend to it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a bleeding occurs, submerge the exposed or drape in lukewarm water, apply pressure over the wound, and use other treatments that restrict blood flow, which are described in the distillation treatment.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	**On the treatment of atrophy affecting the eyelids.**
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atrophy of the eyelids, sometimes caused by moisture, at other times by dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those ointments or liniments at hand, remove the hardened matter from their roots, and apply pressure over the sealed areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain accompanied by blood flow occurs, then you may use a fine, alternating hot and cold cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to make incisions and watch for any signs of their reopening; and when cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned away and do not reopen.
Capitol .ix.	**Chapter IX.**
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	**Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.**
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	**Motives observed on the eyelids of the eyes, due to some cause that resembles a great deal in its strength and hardness, are therefore called 'great'.**
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	**And there is an addition of thick moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.**
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	**Therefore, the operation on them considers whether the greatness is proceeding from within, appearing from the eyelid and affecting the whole; and the cause of it is slight.**
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open that wide fissure according to its extent, and then carefully extract it, suspending it from one side and cutting it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the beginning of the hernia is not visible, but it is only felt, then do not immediately make a large incision, but instead gently penetrate the eyelid with a small incision. In this way, you will not notice it for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the hernia is large, then adjust it with stitches; treat it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer much because the natural healing of the hernia restores and incarnates it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the size is decreasing towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you must remove the surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the hernia with stitches, except for where you initially made the incision, and press on it from all sides. If the eyelid, due to the incision, becomes elongated, it will not be noticed for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with a poultice until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of an acute condition on the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Acute inflammation is caused by the swelling of the upper eyelid's tunics, often affecting children most severely, leading to clouding of their vision and preventing them from looking at the brightness of the sun, due to tears gathering at these eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you apply these measures to their faces all the time, and to their eyes while they sleep; and the eyebrows remain wet from the inflammation that has already covered them, and the imminence of a discharge is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a discharge within those eyes.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in some manner of operation, when the patient's head is in the bed, then place a sheet over them and do some cold application, and make it circular according to the quantity that contains the arterioles from every part, and place that on this and press firmly on both sides of the joint so that additional fluid is added to the middle of the circle, and stop in the middle of that moistened area with a spatula incident to the fissure according to its extent, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Insert into the opening a plug that reaches to where you want to obtain arterioles, for in the case of more advanced procedures, arterioles are extracted through fissures according to the form of white greasiness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those sheets which you have wrapped between your fingers from the parts outside and turn them with your right and left hand until they are completely drained.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to press into the fissure, lest you prevent the sputum from reaching its goal and dislodging that one.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear that your treatment begins at the start of the fissure, you may adjust the fissure slightly to facilitate its progress; then extract that as we have said; and then immerse cloths from him in water and vinegar and place them over the area and apply those as powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some apply salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to help draw out that which is removed by moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an accident occurs at the posthemous location, then apply care with plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On various ways of examining the pulse.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the pulse in the eyelids appears due to the natural growth of hair and becomes antiquated, these conditions on the pulse lead to various ailments with constant tears and softening of the eyelids, causing destruction to the pulse known as "tactinir del huel," and its cure is carried out in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medications as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or through cannulas, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you should place the focus of the ailment on the eye; then turn the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, you are correct; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where there is a firm attachment of tissue from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the tissue towards the edge of the eyelid where the hair begins, and pull the thread firmly away from the eyelid towards its inner side.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then carefully cut open the space between the eyelids, adjust the hairs with a sharp instrument so that they do not interfere with the flow of tears; take out the foreign body and place the eyelid back in position using small cotton or cloth wads, hold it firmly with your finger, and shape it like a moth's wing.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary to consider that the shape varies according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid, for what is required in one case may be different in another, depending on the extent to which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then carefully cut with the scalpel along both lines that you have indicated, beginning at the lacrimal nerve where it enters the lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as the king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the tongs in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it entirely clean, and adjust the stitches with two threads, either silk or fine wool, rinse the blood, and let any excess from the threads adhere to the two eyebrows for certain reasons entangled, if you wish to do so, otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then, after three or four days, open the suture of the threads and treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without suture, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; but a tighter suture is better. Thus, I have told you the ancient practices of the taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nevertheless, there is much effort on the part of the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is nothing to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat it, which is as follows: place a figure like a mushroom on the eyelid, then raise the eyelid with three sharp movements, separating and bringing together according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, having the knives at hand, and it is not cut, then take a needle with thread and insert one in the middle of the figure, and insert the other two close to the lacrimal glands, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lifting all the eyelids over which the figures are placed as we have mentioned.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and heal that which is clean.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If after your incision or opening, an abscess occurs, then treat it with wax and similar things, and clean it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, when the eyelids are affected and their hairs change, then use what we have mentioned about incision; a more artificial suture is done in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To drain cans is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and incise the figure within as I have mentioned; then, with art, make two cans or two thin plates of which the length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width is measured according to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the ends of each cut, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one with subtlety over what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and tighten the cans of each cut with strong rigor, and leave it for some days, for the thread will die due to the tightness and will be rejected, and it will fall off once it has healed by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two incisions according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of painful hairs in the afflicted area with an agule when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and painful hairs in the wounds, the operation on them requires that you use a subtle agule and insert it into that thin thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it very gently and handle it in a most subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it should be the length of the fingers, about the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then take another fine needle, insert it briefly, and twist the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then position the patient's head in a small space, close to the sun so that your work is made clear, as this is a delicate and precise operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the tight hair where it requires attention, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract that from its natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out from its root, insert that into the tweezers, and grasp one or two or three hairs at a time.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then use your hand to pull that out until the hair is completely removed from the tweezers on the eyelid and its natural place.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is pulled apart and the skin is not torn, you will pull the dressing to the parts where you have placed the bandage, so that the dressing does not come loose from the wound above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when you have the sight of the wound, then you will remove the dressing and the bandage, and clean any dirt or claws in the wound, and leave the cloth for two or three days, so that the skin sticks to its place and a good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, you will adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and raise it to that height, or leave it until it grows, so that it extends over some space, and then you will raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	CAPITUL XIII. (In Latin, indicating the title or subject of the chapter.)
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that occurs on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see the eye becoming cloudy, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes either to the right or left, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, it is called cataracts, and this cloudiness can be either natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar to their illnesses.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation is that you open up and separate the consolidation, and divide the lips of it, then place in it a piece of cloth, and bind them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must use healing methods from the causes that dry out and constrict; for if you do this, it will cause the cataract to return worse than before, with no improvement at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify, such as fenugreek, and soak in water in which the seeds have been cooked or in vinegar, which should be liquid enough with some of the oil, and immerse the cloth in it, and apply to the affected area.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate everything that is not consolidated according to the form in which it appears at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing other than a correction of deviated components that do not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of hernia in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia, which is done in the eyelid, and is actually called a "deviation" (not hernia), is either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental hernias can be caused by sickness, incisions, cauterization, or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating is that you take a needle with which you make double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it through the tear from left to right, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh apart from its sides with the needle, and cut with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the eyelid to its original shape if it is suitable; otherwise, take a thread and hold that in the split area, and turn the eyelid over, and make two slits on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two slits should form two angles of the incision you made, which meet, and so that when they converge, a shape is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then push the flesh aside as much as necessary, leaving enough space for the eye to be exposed.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then arrange the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; likewise, treat the affected areas with the medicines mentioned above for softening and washing until it is cured.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase or tighten using incisions, sutures, or cauterization, then make a flat incision in the skin of the eyelid as mentioned above.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the calculus between two lips as mentioned before.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discussion on the treatment of raising or lowering, when it is above or below, let the operation proceed according to the preparation for the form of the raise, and that is in a diverse manner of spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsman always prepares a device in some way that is possible for it to restore the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats each illness according to what suits them from the operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in most people, they think that the eyelid is firmly attached to the white part of the eye, and it prevents the ease of movement and its natural functions, so you must insert your finger between the lid and the eyeball, and lift the lid over it, or extend it with the help of a dropper.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp enough to cause additional injury, making it slightly blunted so that the disease is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not harm the eye's sensitivity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should remove that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can be returned to its natural form, and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then immerse it in salt water with which you wash; or distill it from sun-warmed water dissolved in the liquid.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a drop of water, and place on the eye a woolen compress soaked in egg albumen, and for the third day use consolidating causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI.**
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eye and the prominence of the flesh of the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eyelid is in two manners: either it is nervous, like a thin hard chip; or non-nervous, resembling white frosted moisture, which, when pricked with a needle, is cut off and the chip does not adhere to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until the major tear duct, little by little, covers the sight and blocks light and movement of tears.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating in the incision of the eye is that the patient's head should be placed under the table, and the eyelids opened with one hand, while the other raises the upper eyelid, and then catches the corner of the eye with a forceps, making a few gentle movements to relax it.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into one of the small hairs from horse, bull, cow, or similar, gradually doubling the end of the needle, leaving it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate with the needle, tying the hair to the needle; extend that above the eyelids, and extract the hair from the edge of the eyelid which blocks the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you extract the hair from behind it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then carefully incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors, and remove the flesh from the natural tear duct so that by making this incision, continuous flow of tears does not occur.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some also use an ungual (nail) or file, as we have said, and then carefully trim it with a sharp spatula to shape it thus.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula, do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After making the incision, apply a little coarse salt or any suitable medicine, and leave it for about a day; then take care of it until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it deeply embedded in the flesh, then attend to this type of nail being cured with medicines, and it will heal thus, when cut off at the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise it, open the wound of the malady and take a thin piece of sharp steel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtility.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it becomes hardened and closed up in that wound, slowly extract it from your side in the wound of greatest pain, either with a hot iron or a sharp knife, and keep the wound open for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that part until everything that is infected is removed, otherwise a foul pus will form in the wound, and when you leave it, take care at the beginning of the infection until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat your operation on that part until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended immediately; and incise it from that one part, but do not close the incision so as not to block the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill the main tear duct carefully until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and that which is born from adherent flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is flesh that is born sick, and it is so swollen that it covers the pupil or moves very close to the eyelids, pressing them against each other, and it is assembled with rough splints from wood.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The surgical procedure is such that the patient holds their side in pain; then open the incision of that area and collect all the flesh with scissors suitable for this, and hold it with a forceps or a basket; then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful of the wound so you do not damage your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision is the one where we incise those or extract the pus that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small forceps, collected carefully according to the shape that it takes, appropriately for this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt trita (fine-ground salt) or sprinkle on it a powder made from rogues (possibly a type of herb or medicine), similar to corrosive medicines, and place over it a clean cloth or albumen (a protein) until it is assuredly safe from abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of inflammation and severe pain is noticed, and there is fear of gangrene, then examine the wound and treat that gangrene with something that relieves that gangrene, and repeatedly perform surgery on it until it is healed, and make sure that the adjacent flesh, which occurs in this particular wound, does not become infected.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, it is possible that you may be able to achieve complete cure of the acute pain through natural or accidental means, using a knife, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the affected member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	**On the Collection of Knowledge in Wounds**
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are resistant to treatment and hinder the progression of healing, especially when their duration extends over many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider if the pain in which you are aware is strong and there is no other ailment known in it, then you will collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to hold their breath and then gently press those veins with your thumb or index finger, according to your discretion. The pressure should be subtle and of a double nature, following this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two fingers gradually on one side of the body, following this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And when those veins are collected with subtle force and carefully, abstain from pressing the sanction immediately; wait until you see those veins refill with blood and feel them pulse.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to cause pain in the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning, facing the sun, and you are strong in your action, do not pierce any veins except those intended.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distil warm vinegar or wine into the wound to corrode whatever remains of the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to collect all of this at that hour, then apply a poultice to it until the pain subsides and ensure that there is no risk of infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this process according to the nature of the illness until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method of the forks:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of tumours in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you rise from rest using a cautery or sharp medicine according to the description of the condition and it is not healed, then do not apply treatment to it but instead make incisions over the affected area after assessing its severity, and extract all the moisture present within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then use a tool in the shape of this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a sharp knife, and it should be made to cut, and the skull should also be rounded so that it can be pierced with a thin point (just as in the following shape).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then carefully turn it between your fingers, and gently press with your hand until you know that the corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done at times, then restore the area with astringent and drying agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there is good flesh, the intestine is separated from the healthy and robust body for forty days, without renewal or fistula, and no further harm occurs to it, then you know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not in the bone but only a fissure needs to be reduced to its natural shape, then follow this manner: you discern according to the instrument or acute medicine used, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should first be extended within the extremity to the same extent as the width.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that on the bone, and it should be the size of a tear; extend your hand a little further, and then turn your hand over the rib so that it penetrates through all the bone, and the patient feels the pain as if air is coming out from within when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that dry out as directed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh around the area has hardened, the matter that was discharged from the openings returns to its original state, thus making it less painful for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	**On the Reduction of Swelling**
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling protrudes excessively and does not yield to ordinary treatment or decrease, it is necessary to remove the patient's clothing, apply pressure, and then make incisions in the neck for better drainage; afterward, apply a liniment made of aloe, henna, and sassafras to the swollen area, and firmly compress the bandage with motz (fine powder).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is to take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is folded in half four times; and make these folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then arrange them one over the other according to the amount of the substance that requires mixing.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten over these with a piece of cloth with a strong, firm structure; and apply suction with the cups for their scarification; and remove the cups, leaving the substance tightly attached during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then ensure it is tightly bound.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And keep the ligature tight during the day and night as well, just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, well, then it is, and otherwise, continue the application of the poultice with powders, compression, and cups until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the eminence of the uvula tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When it is necessary to disrupt the uvula tunic, and it becomes prominent and the eyelids are moved as if by a grain of sand, and the shape of the person is thus altered, and you want to perform an incision on them, then the operation on them is as we have described, that you insert the needle at the base of the uvula from below, and then insert another needle through which there is a double fold of the lacrimal part, and cause it to penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then cut the location of the double fold and lift that portion of the uvula around the needle, and tighten that muscle.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in honey, and let it remain until the thread falls off the uvula.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then attend to the wound with something that will comfort the inside until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from all over, a large circle of cloth is gathered around the wound, and then it is perforated with a thin blade that reaches the base of the wound, and the white humidity flows out, and the wound descends and eventually heals.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then it is strengthened so that it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of nobles.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This affliction called alconati is nothing but a sanity that descends into the wound, resembling flowing water, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of operating is that you should stop the malady on its course, and then take hold of the patient's head with both your hands from two different sides, and press until you feel the flow of blood reaching the distant parts, and so it stops and does not descend, and light is brought, and thus the malady sees its causes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent of the fluid into the wound is not prepared as we have said, then stop the malady between your hands and take a subtle spike and make a cut there above the panniculus covering a little before the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (in the place wanted), until the fluid is drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So when it is drained, then you distil the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is treated as other causes within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII.**
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water retention (edema).
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have discussed the types of water retention in its division and it is appropriate to drill into the speech declaring, according to health, that...
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you understand that you must sever the illness between your hands on a couch and bind its water strongly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye with water retention, if the eye with water is the left one; or your right hand, if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then apply your right hand, if the pain is on the left side; or your left hand, if the pain is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then, hold the tip of the magnet close to the edge of the eye, considering the thickness of the tear in the socket, and slowly turn your hand while keeping the magnet on the skin.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then, penetrate into the socket of the eye, and feel that the magnet has already been attracted to the cause of the pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And observe that the distance from the magnet to the point it touches should be equal to the space between the pupil and the edge of the black disc, which is the corona of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then, place the magnet inside the area where the water is, and pull it down once, then release it, and soon after, the pain will leave the part on which his sight was fixed, and the magnet will attach to its socket.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; so if water is let down, you must rest that other time until the bladder is emptied.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore, when it is contracted and does not descend, you should extract the bladder with ease, and turn your hand a little at a time, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt gem in water and wash the inside with that water; and then remove the inflamed part or stop it or use wool infused in rosy oil and albumen of an egg and apply it to the swelling.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But for us, and those of our time, it is better to treat it with tripe and egg albumen.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey to your bladder against the pull of the swelling - for it is one of those men where the swelling is hard -, then know that you must take the sponge which is named alum, whose form this is:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce that joint, and do not end your hand in the trunk, and it is only when you make a subtle passage at that place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the instrument according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's peaceful sleep, made comfortably on their back in a dark room, and forbidden from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And hold it in a way that allows its nature to be cleared, not twisting their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And it should be bound according to its position within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then carefully remove that in this dark place and examine the bright sight, and discern some causes, and return the bandage within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And be aware that you should not do this during treatment or soon after an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You likely understand that this should be done because the water can then easily and violently emerge due to great pressure.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If it happens that gangrene occurs cautiously, then know that you should clean the wound in front of the seventh day and correct any fluid discharge from the affected area.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then examine the patient closely and place your hand over the mouth to regulate the breathing for several days, especially during the night's darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually reduce the use of that remedy and discuss its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that at times the student is not exempt from seeing certain things, and then you should be bold in your judgment regarding the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached some of those who are in the art of surgery, and one says that fire should be made in the air with a certain instrument through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have never seen such a perfect instrument in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books, and it may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices of magic that should be over those who ignore them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus with that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are diverse layers of flesh within the nose, some caused by a growth of many small feet or polyps in the nasal passages, this illness is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is flesh that is cancerous, pale, of dark color; and it is this flesh that is the lion's flesh, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that flesh of the lion which is neither deceitful nor cancerous, you should do thus: open the wound between your fingers and place it in the sun, dry the nose of it, and pick at the small lump in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract it from the parts outside, and carefully divide what you have understood from that subtle action of one part within, knowing that all the flesh is already held; if there remains any cause of which the separation is possible, then use this as a tool to divide it with subtlety among the facilitators, so long as no other cause arises.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you have a fever or an acute apthetic abscess, then apply it to what it covers; or if it is one of the malignant absceses, cut and cauterize that part which has separated and leave the cavities entirely open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then, you should be vigilant at the nose; make an incision there and apply vinegar or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is blocked and you perceive humidity inside the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then know that inside there is flesh full of pus surrounding the bones of the nose to which the incision has not yet reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should insert the instrument carefully into the part where there is any hardness, and gently in and out, and between each movement, take a little or much as necessary, and thus dislodge the patient's illness and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either by force or for other causes that are possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this is done, it releases its aromatic essence so that it reaches the nostrils' canals and sits on its crown, for many times seeing these actions makes children in schools emulate them, and it is a minor cause for anyone who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the thread, one end emerging from the nose and the other pulling on the thread, and apply pressure to the flesh with the fingers around the threads, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the thread, and after cleaning the nose with a warm compress, apply an ointment for three days or more until the infection has destroyed all the damaged flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a nasal cannula made of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If there is a treatment that proves effective, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the design of an early distillation apparatus used to extract oils and medicines from plants:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small cavity, and the material should resemble it.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube similar to a cane, and the nozzle of the distillation apparatus should be flat, open; it should have a handle at the rear end of it, which you hold when distilling oils or water from the extracts and substances that adhere to it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the components of this distiller: recipe of birch bark, ginger, and safran piletre, long pepper, hellebore, and epazote, mixed with lemon suck and prepared into pills; one pill is taken with hot water and placed in the patient's nostrils.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow from the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Various growths are seen at the ends of the nose, and they swell and increase in size over certain days until the attention of them must be given.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this, you must understand the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply over the area either cautery or medicine that is appropriate for its location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its incision is delayed and it becomes swollen, consider if it is blackened, hard, of a dark color, and without feeling, then do not touch it with a sharp instrument, for growths that appear at such an apostema carry great malice for the one who bears it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is a severe infection and not of a dark color, in some cases incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the evil and cut into it with caution, and treat the area with something that drains and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and auricle when continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit results from such an operation except for certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any of these conditions due to some cause, and it is a fresh wound with pus, then you should adjust the two edges of the wound with suture, and care for it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then be sure to extract each part from its adjacent tissue until it is completely clean.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen them; sprinkle sacred fire on them and cover with a thin layer of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing, leave it for two or three days, then remove that dressing and replace it with another one, leaving it until the flesh is completely healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique for the suture is that you add the solution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity to the wound, as you know best.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII.**
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	To extract those causes that come in both cheeks within the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	These swellings are often seen in many people within the parts inside their cheeks; some of them are hard like firm fat from erysipelas, and others are larger or smaller.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So, he will open the cheeks and extract each of those hard swellings from every part, and then he will fill the space with a clean dressing while the wound is still fresh, and he will wash it with wine and treat the area with water that has been strained, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the tissue attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Cutting into the enlarged gums that were once called albulus, so he will either suspend them with a hook or hold them with forceps and cut them as necessary, and let the healthy blood flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply over the area a sage or other astringent and purgative powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason of toothache.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth within and without, and between the gums, there are rough cuts, scars, and some are blackened and turned red or yellow, due to this, corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you should remove the pain between your hands and place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and pull out the teeth in which these rough cuts and similar appearances are visible, without causing any further damage, and do this for their blackening and yellowing and other similar issues as long as they have not been cured.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if something remains in the beginning of the reasoning, good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning on those points for another day and the next, until it comes to the final statement regarding what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth have required various forms and shapes of surgical tools according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For these reasons, the scalpel with which the tooth is removed from its socket is different from the one used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and you must prepare these various shapes of scalpels that you will often encounter:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and time in its complete eradication, for there is no cause to delay its extraction once it is removed, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse is not valid during the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain often deceives and makes us believe it comes from a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through operations performed by barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know it well, you will then realize that you need to sacrifice part of the gum tissue around the tooth using a scalpel, or fine forceps, starting from a small beginning, until the tooth is completely detached from the gingiva.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use pliers with strong grip for good manipulation or extraction, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them steady, and carefully pull the tooth according to its straightness so as not to break it or cause more pain to the disease.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it there from all sides with ease and effort remove it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or rotten, you must take a piece of cloth wrap it around that wound and stretch it with the tip of a thin wire so that it does not slip during your tightening grip on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification precisely in all parts of the gum and watch closely so that you do not break or tear it, then return to the patient for further treatment as the pain becomes more intense than the first.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity regarding the removal of teeth, for they do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, many times they cause great pain to men that is much more difficult to endure, and the roots of their teeth become completely broken, or some of them, or even those from which we have extracted certain bones in the mandible, as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then proceed with the eradication of it, rinse your mouth with wine or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are discharges of pus for a certain time, then also as the inflammations increase, cut off some amount of it and wash over the sore with hot water, and if that pus does not come out, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be fine and thin, suitable for extracting a tooth from its beginning, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when used in such cases.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And similarly, when using forceps with thick handles, make sure they are not bent when you first open them; the ends should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They are made of Indian iron and have straight ends; the tips of these forceps have teeth where one fits into the other, and they open with a strong downward pull, and sometimes the tips of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak that has no curl, and they are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is embedded for some reason, first apply heat to the area for one or two days until it becomes softened. Then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are shaped like a bird's beak, known as a ciconia or guanta, and carefully extract the tooth.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of these should be filed or smoothed with a file or rasps.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions with the pliers or tongs, then carefully dig around the root and expose all the flesh, and insert the instrument known as a small lever, whose shape is thus:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but strong thread, small in diameter, not wrapped so as to not be easily cut.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the incision is forgotten, this is it; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at its end, with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is triangular, with an even thinner end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now, with this instrument, having two slopes, the appropriate shape is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments used for tooth extraction; indeed, an operation is performed with this instrument resembling a large comb, and its shape is...
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may have some thickness, but is not obscured so that it is not distorted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools with moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans, through their understanding of the art, discover for themselves the secrets of various operations and illnesses; for there are ailments to which the ancients did not give attention or create specific instruments, due to the diverse forms they take.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bones in the mouth are distorted, then apply gentle treatment to that area using the appropriate instruments and forceps, as we mentioned for removing teeth, and assist with the maneuver whose form this illustration depicts.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small defect, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that it does not protrude or escape, and then restore the area with appropriate medicines for such a purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, then quickly remove the debris from that hole and from its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol XXXII:** 
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of the prominent teeth among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape, especially in women and particularly the more delicate ones; then consider: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, you must extract it; rather than leaving it attached to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument which resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made over the tooth in many days due to the tooth's hardness, and it should not touch any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to erosion, then use a lime made of Indian steel with this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be entirely made of Indian steel with a precisely shaped edge; and have small, pointed tips like needles, with which the tooth is cleaned gradually over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or affected.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then cut those at the end, and quickly remove those with other razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth that is causing the problem and it hurts the tongue, you must cut into the space where the pain originates, ensuring that the pressure from this issue does not prevent the tongue from moving freely or distort speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter XXXIII.**
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by concussion or removal due to impact or breakage, and the patient's condition cannot be improved with conventional treatments, it is necessary to use gold wire instead of silver for strengthening, as silver corrodes over time, while gold remains unchanged.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is to take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then increase its curvature towards two damaged teeth, or if only one or a few, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then continue the stitching within the opening from which you began, and tighten your hand with ease and wisdom so as not to damage it.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the tension with which you tighten the thread should be such that it does not pull out the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off the excess thread using pincers or scissors, and place them at appropriate locations with your fingers, then fold them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then apply this strap so tight as a Roman would.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes loose or breaks, tighten it or those parts with another strap in the same manner throughout the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of correction for two healthy teeth and two rotten ones, thus when you tie these together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their proper place in their locations, and they grow again as we have recommended, then they remain healthy.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this can only be done by skilled artisans and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes, certain causes relate to the bones of a cow, and they are shaped like teeth, placed in the location where the tooth is missing, tightened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament which is found on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which prevents the tongue from moving occasionally, or is natural and normal to man, or is accidental and occurs due to a disease which has already become hardened.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, releasing its existence in the lower part; and lift up their tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to its width until the tongue is released from its restriction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or tightness in that area, which is due to the hardening of a disease, then you apply oil and cut it according to its width until you incise the ligament and dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that you do not cause a wound in the flesh, and that you do not break any blood vessels so that pus does not flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then, wash the clothing around the incision with warm water or vinegar or a cleansing water; then leave the tongue unmoving; it is necessary that the patient keeps the tongue quiet during each night so that it does not get stuck again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a pus flow occurs, apply vinegar to the area; if the pain increases, cauterize the area with a hot iron that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cure for other causes, as long as it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On extraction of the ranula, remove the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes accidents occur causing the tongue to become swollen and resembling a small, closed mouth, preventing it from performing its natural function; and because of this, its strength is greatly reduced within the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on them is to open the patient's mouth wide, facing the sun, and assess the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a faint red or black, hard, color, where the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that part which is cracked.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white, in which there is humidity, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, cutting it all away; and if the blood flows at the time of your operation, then hold a clean cloth over it, using vinegar, as long as the bleeding is contained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work, having completed it as much as possible, and wash the wound with vinegar and salt; and tend to the other remedies for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and those that are nothing in the glans, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When swelling in the glans occurs, there are glands that are closely packed together, which break out and are called two auricles. When you treat them as mentioned above in the previous division and they do not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and then do not touch it with a needle.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a dark color and the base is thick, do not touch it with a needle due to the flow of pus; instead, let it mature as it is, and either it will be discharged on its own or it will break through by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the base is thin, then that one needs to be cut open.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the inflammation of it has been completely rested by cautery or if it has diminished in any way; and then stop the evil before the sun, and let the head of it be in the low position, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of it gently with a fine instrument of which this is the shape.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Whether it is made of silver or bronze, it should be fine and sharp.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on the tongue and show the inflammation to your patient, sit down in front of that low position, take pincers and place them on the affected area, and pull it out as much as possible outside.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the shape.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It resembles a pair of forceps, yet its extremities are curved, so the orifice of each of those is at the tip of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron initially covered in cloth.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then cut out a spatula of which this is the form: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one slit, cut the other according to this same manner of cutting, and then close the incision with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an excessive flow of blood, dress the wound with decoccion water from chamomile or mint leaves and similar to those used in cases of severe bleeding until the flow of blood is stopped, and then tend to that so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, if other remedies fail, you should apply two auricles here and two there, cutting them as you have been taught in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	You have already treated a woman suffering from an abscess that originated in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, had closed the opening in her groin, and the woman was breathing heavily, had forbidden herself to eat or drink water, and was close to death if more time had passed, perhaps for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already strained so much that it had formed two openings through which pus could be drained.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So, you should cut them open and remove the abscess, taking a large portion of it, and then you should incise that one from which you understood the other wound, and then you should press the mouth of the abscess, and seize its tongue, and then place the abscess in that opening.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then make a large incision, and let no blood flow from it but a little.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the treatment for that woman is as follows: immediately start drinking water and then consume food. Thus, you should not repeat the incision from that sore spot for a long time, but rather move on to another location, where another incision can be made, which will help extend the healing process.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should apply a hot iron and cauterize the sore spot, which will additionally help; then walk around and do not clean that place with water, as God has already healed it for you.
Capitol .xxxvii.	**Capitol .xxxvii.** (Note: The numbering seems to be out of sequence, but I will translate as requested.)
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Regarding the incision of the hernia when it is localized.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh (accumulation of mucus or phlegm) in the hernia is localized, and it is long and narrow, then it is called perpendicular; but if it is broad and round at the opening, then it is called a bulge.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	In the treatment of what we have mentioned in the previous section, and if your treatment does not agree with this, and indeed, after making an incision, the hernia has already receded and is small, then you should incise that which is added round; but if it is of considerable length, and is sanguineous, of a dark red or black color, and does not give way to pressure, then be wary of making an incision, for there is danger involved in the condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you should ease the pain by applying pressure with an instrument that shapes its form, then place a new one on top, and pull it down, making an incision with one of the two instruments used in dividing into two parts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to insert anything but what is appropriate according to nature, because if you insert more of it, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision, use your skill in the cauterization process to calm their fear, and the manner of applying the cautery to them is nothing but sharp steel, and it is that you hold the head of the patient on the table, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living wound, and ensure it is neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument, which has this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extremity of the cavity where the medicine is placed should be concave like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of it, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the inherent nature of the medicine, preventing any damage to their throat.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, extract it from the throat until the space allows for its degradation and sedation by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, submerge the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap within a tube until the wrap adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as you need for the cauterization of the uvula, then let it sit so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, then for the cauterization, place the wrap soaked in the medicine around the uvula, clean that which is in the circulation of its medicine with water, wash it thoroughly with hot water, and treat outside with embrocation, and internally with purgatives until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This specific type of treatment is much safer than incision and free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times the ulcer is cured with something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is healed by smoking in this manner: take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic chicory, camomile, broyde, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine and let them bubble; and the wave should be struck gently and decently, and there should be a trough in the middle of the wave where an instrument shaped like a hook is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the opening of the patient's throat until the vapor reaches the uvula over the epiglottis, and the uvula becomes significantly obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process over the affected areas while they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment when there is a risk of developing abscesses, as you would tighten the abscess too much, and it's important that you don't do that unless you have received permission from the doctor who has examined the cauterized area.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and attach a bell of fire at its end, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, for the bell of fire prevents the burning vapor from reaching the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	**Chapter XXXVIII.**
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of thorns and other substances adhering to the skin, and on other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may observe substances adhering to the skin, or thorns in the flesh, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract what is apparent from these [substances], focusing your sight on it, and using your tongue as an instrument before the light, so that you may clearly see what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for powerful vomiting will expel the foreign body lodged in the gullet; or make them swallow a piece of napkin or shredded lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed, twist it tightly with a string, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spikes and is extracted, it will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you may take a snake and mix it with vinegar, place it in the fire and extract it; or take a leek and cut it open and extract its contents.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If it is not forgotten about those causes that we have mentioned, then use an iron tool in the following manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thick enough to pierce and narrow at the end that you can easily insert it into their mouth.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise his head up, and be careful of the touch of his bone in the throat, so that he may take in air and ease the pain or pressure on the bone or spine, or what the doctor places his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Yet if the illness that has entered is more severe, due to his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and he feels it descending, he places his hand on the instrument on him, all according to the amount prepared for him until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The lack of specific content makes it impossible to provide a meaningful translation or interpretation in this context.)
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of appendices attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating an appendix as we have discussed regarding treatment with medications and not surgically removing it, consider the sunlight on the throat of the patient, since you will have to remove his tongue using the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that small or subtle cause respectfully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the cause, then take a concave needle and insert it into the hollow of the patient's condition, and then place on the concavity of the needle a heated iron, and do this several times (while the blood flow is stopped and the cause removed from the hollow) and keep the patient cool with water throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with water, open it to the patient's mouth, and use it to wash their mouth; do not spill any cause from it, and pour the water out through your hand another time, as soon as the blood flow begins to feel the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with herbs or safron through the instruments we have recommended for uvula fumigation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls in place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operating in suffocation of that is that you take a cloth with hot coals and cover it with a covering in the middle of which there is an opening, and fix the end of the instrument to that opening; then apply the suffocation from above; and have the patient close his mouth at the end of the tube, and seal his mouth so that the suffocation is not blown out until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, for the blood will soon flow.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with hot air again and again, forbid the patient from drinking, and have him eat salty foods and herbs, and do not let him drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly observed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in that it has no curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed on the gullet, and its extremity resembles a swan's beak, which is called the 'guant', in which it is sharpened with lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	**Chapter XL.**
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discussion regarding the prevention and treatment of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special spots, of various shapes and sizes, according to the memory of their origin, each described in detail in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in puncture and section from two different methods: one is for the specific abscess itself, and another for addressing the humidity associated with them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method targets areas where bodily accidents occur, as abscesses in the head differ from those in the foot, and an abscess in fleshy tissue differs from one affecting a joint, each requiring specific surgical treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some pustules are such that they do not need to be pierced, but rather allow the maturation of the pus within them or the completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other pustules need to be opened when they become swollen and are not mature according to their course; similarly, there are pustules that are prone to joints, where the pustule appears near a joint, its presence in the vicinity of the joint prolongs the time it takes for it to heal, and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is a pustule near a major member, and if you delay piercing it while it is still mature, it will affect the main member; or it is near the buttocks, so pierce one that has not yet matured; and do not pierce it when it is dry, but rather one that is prone to the buttocks, so that you do not drain its pus and it elongates within the fissures of the buttocks, creating a fistula, or opening in the term of the pustule that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Maybe you already know the moment for piercing the abscess, and thus it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it ripens when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and then there is a decrease in redness and pulse, and the swelling of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that you should pierce the site filled with pus beneath the abscess and coming from the healing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be done through the thickness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the joints, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to the member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Maybe you should wait for the abscess to be in a fleshy location, then it is better to delay piercing it until its digestion is confirmed according to what we have said; for if you pierce it too soon, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and increases the soreness and hardness of its edges, and deepens its infection.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	You may make some incisions in certain places on the body as needed, either according to the thickness of the flesh or the part that requires it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large incisions make deep cuts or wide sections according to the diversity of the size of the incisions.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	There are also incisions in which the skin should be cut and lifted, where such a pain occurs as if it were done in terms of a pan and cut, so as happens in cases of gangrene and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	Of those that are cut in a section with three angles, and of those that are incised as if in the form of a myrtle leaf, such as in the incisions on the knees.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of their kind, where round section and half-moon section are administered, similar to those mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If that one to whom no such symptoms appear when applying external heat, be sure to pierce that with a shallow or flat puncture.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the swelling is great and a lot of pus has collected, do not pierce it at once; after removing some of the pus, wait until the next day and then remove another portion, increasing the size gradually as the swelling decreases.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is very young, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an elderly person with weak vitality, for the animal spirit quickly resolves itself towards the release of pus, and thus the illness can be fatal; in such cases, you must perform the operation.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter: when making the punctures for these abscesses, be sure to wash and clean them; consider whether the abscess is small or a broad cut, then administer the appropriate remedies; and if the abscess is large, and the wounds from the puncture are deep, you must apply pressure in several places until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the skin or tissue is separated from the bone in the abscess, cover it with a piece of fine cloth or thread from linen, just as you would cover wounds with bandages or razors, to maintain its moisture; and tighten that around on the third day; and then treat and cure that area with enguentz until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If bleeding occurs during your operation, administer clean water and mix in some linen cloth, and place that over the area where the blood is flowing, and press it to control the flow.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you must administer treatments and remedies as recommended at various points in this text and in division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter, and the abscess is located in a place with many nerves, then you must apply poultices on hot oil and place them over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply cool poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and change them every day as we have said, and be sure to loosen the crust and clean that area and apply what is suitable for its healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of all hernias universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned about each hernia in terms of how its cure should be handled in particular chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli. (Forty-first Chapter)
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of hernias that occur in the groin area of the body.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the groin area of the head, there are small hernias, which are of various types with layers that are formed; and these have different names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come drops, and those contain a moisture resembling lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling sweat, and similar to them; and those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not cause any unpleasantness.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you expect those with an instrument shaped accordingly, which is called an entrom, as long as you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then you cut those apart according to length by sectioning the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of line B within the line of G. So, after the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave from that any cause of pain, as troops seen returning, if there remains from that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian oil, if present, or in water and salt; fill it with that medicine and leave it for another day, as this corrodes everything that is broken in that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you repeat the application of hot Egyptian oil to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no further cause for concern in that layer; once the wound is healed, cure it with oil.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with fatty knots, then incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make a clean incision in the shape of a cross, open it between the two folds of the section and remove that part entirely, pushing your virtue to extract the tunic containing that matter.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If it causes resistance at your discretion, then do as I have initially told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And it seems to be done in the case of an abscess by section and cure as we have told you; and the section over a lapified abscess is lighter, because it is of little pain and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are these abscesses in the head which, in certain men, have no humidity; which causes are because you must incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and drain it with a hard, sharp, white stone, which cannot be chewed, and if anyone were to hit it, it would bring harm to them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, apart from those mentioned above, which appear on the heads of children and require shaving the hair, the section of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part, so that the disease is not spread to the deeper parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then address those affected as best suits the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXXIV.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section regarding scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are often seen in the collarbone, armpits, and angles (or joints), but sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the collarbone are often caused by their formation between each other, and all scrofula of these derives from its own tunic, and likewise with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are abscesses, some of which are stone-like, others contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, when you encounter a case with good disposition for treatment, of which the color is clearly red, and it is more painful at all points, not attached to any nerves, veins, or tendons, and not swollen, be sure to incise it along the dry surface from this point onwards, leaving the body part outside the line of G to the line of B, and remove it completely, extending the edges of the wound with as many incisions as needed, just as we have said in the previous sections, and extract that small portion bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the knife should not be too sharp, nor should it fit your hand for cutting, or cause distress to the patient, and you should not cut what is not necessary; because if you were to cut a vein or tendon, it would prohibit your operation, leaving the wound infected with vitriol or other powders that prevent the flow of pus, and aggravate the plague, and leave it untreated until the pain subsides and the plague becomes softened and begins to be purified.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until the assistant has completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the aforementioned indicated area to see if there are any causes of other small hernias; incise and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large hernia, you must be careful not to incise that hernia from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	First, be sure that the fold of the skin is tightly closed and does not open on its own, without assistance.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with warm Egyptian ointment that you have already prepared, and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you completely incise that scrofula, you will see that you must close the two edges of the wound and allow some time for any excess pus to drain.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If it happens that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, you must understand how to incise the base of it, drain it, and then apply a suture and what is mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial puncture at the place where you see the formation of it, and stop the discharge of pus from below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then apply the puncture, you should find some similar things and use them to corrode what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, you must heal it with a generative flesh-like substance until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilot (or edge) of the aperture, make a cut through the gum (or tissue) layer.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section at the edge (or root) of the abscess, and I have not seen any person in our land who does this.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription from the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	One should be cautious in people who have sensitivity, ensuring the extraction of the edge (or root) of the abscess is done carefully; otherwise, it may cause harm due to all the veins and major parts of the affected area being here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or between the teeth, when the disease is not in the gums, be cautious of the extraction of the edge (or root) to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to treat this, we incise the epiloth between three circles of the epiloth, or four with a small section according to the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, and the section should be in ciphas, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting, as it is devoid of flesh and the channels of blood are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, he should extend the suture of the wound with care, and then open the suture until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you know any cause for concern.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then he should incise the ciphas as we have recommended; and it signifies on the section of the channel by the inflammation which is of that very nature, for the purpose of rupturing the hernia and by the removal of the knot.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is right for the piercing, add two layers of cloth from the wound's edge, and with that single one, the cartilage should be pierced.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And we have seen that the entire discourse which we have compiled is nothing but to show that some of these apertures have already been used in the treatment of illness, and the illness has entered into death, and its breath has been cut off, and others are about to incise the epiglot so that the illness may breathe in the area of the wound for a little while, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason, we will leave the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days. And therefore, at the right time, you will command that the wound be closed, and its cure should take place until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a knife and cuts into the throat of the patient and makes an incision in one part of the lung, and I was called for its cure, and I examined the mouth as if it were crying out from the dead, and I uncovered the disease and treated the wound which had come from the disease.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you confessed that she had not cut into any veins or guided the breath, and the air was coming from the wound, and you treated it inside until it was healed by fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not scold the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after a few days return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XLV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section concerning the incision over an abscess that occurs outside the glans, which is called a hernia of the glans.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called a hernia of the glans, is a large abscess according to the condition of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners: either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, it is not susceptible to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a presumptuous diagnosis except for the patient who requests it.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it and investigate it with your fingers, if you find it resembling thick knots, not suspended from any of the veins, then incise them thusly like nodes, and extract whatever is contained within the skin and bursae; otherwise, scrutinize its entire being, and apply treatment to the area in need of cure until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the removal of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The knots have various species, and you have already described all their kinds in the previous division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary to distinguish the difference between a knot and an excrescence with careful consideration.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and severe pain until the inflammation of excess substances subsides; and it is filled with putrefaction which ceases fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	There is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it accounts for the lion that resides in the body's sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is made also with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fat or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a nodule, you must expel it and inquire about the beginning of the storm that is called an "intromiss" according to how its form appears in the chapter most appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the manner of inquiry about abscesses and all nodules, and it is that you take this storm and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around it little by little until you know that this storm has already penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then secure your hand according to the measurement of the depth of the wound, and extract the foreign body and consider what has remained in the track of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color, then you insert the incision into the superficial layer as I have said in the other wounds.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity in the track of the foreign body, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, raise the incised area, remove the string from all parts with ease, and examine the wound or sac, if possible, over that place and extract that health from the nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should look at it carefully, and then extract it slowly until it does not tear for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it does not tear for any reason, whether little or too much, the knot returns according to the best method.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that a small part of the tear has occurred, complete the damage with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place a warm poultice over the one that is most painful, and treat the other from the original injury until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the tear and treat that with this medicine.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If a venous pulse is against it, or not pulsatile, then you cut and apply the place of a three-angled zigzag that is made with vitriol and let that tightness for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanc; and then return to dissect what is broken from the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for cutting and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and there are three kinds, of which some are larger, others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and other metals, and their cutting edges are sharpened to perform the operation skillfully in specific locations.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the practices of those experienced, and they are called 'albered', and one of them is known as 'berid'.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it is of three parts: one great, another middle, and the smallest.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the experienced one great, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the experienced middle, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the experienced smallest, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So therefore for those apertures, ruptures, fistulas, and hernias, so that between them are bones and from others causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus are made round, thick, leathery ones, also with great needles sewn onto them, and they are done of iron wire, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when done of iron wire.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experience of black plumes is made, which accord that by these fistulas are opened in the cavity of which there are reflections, which shall be reflected to their lightness upon those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, others medium-length, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced great plume:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced medium plume:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the experienced small plume:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the plums are diverse and spicy, some being simple curves, and they are categorized into three types: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their bodies' humors, there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those, there are two curvatures, which are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curvatures as well, which are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple large incision, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a simple smaller incision:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a very small simple incision, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a smaller hook, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a very small hook, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A large hook with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A smaller hook with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A very small hook with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	A large hook with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A smaller hook with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a hook has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and scrape nodules and pustules, and they are of three sizes, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades and the other ends are not sharp, but they are curved in such a way that they can make precise incisions during the removal of nodules without damaging veins or nerves, and through this, the disease is healed and after care is assured with minimal discomfort due to the adjustment required for excorciation of the pustule.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of medicines, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large magic:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of medium magic:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small magic:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of earth and look like rays from which alcohol is produced.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the extreme side, there is a hidden point with a spatula, and that cuts into the inside and outside parts, as you wish, so too.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between these parts during the piercing of the appositions and do not harm the patient, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of veins through which the blood flow is obstructed are of three kinds; large, medium and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citric ery (possibly a material used for treatment), round or slightly elongated, and very thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of veins, large, medium and small, be chosen so that by obstructing the flow of blood they act quickly when needed, and at first glance, are not medicinal.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using those to obstruct blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, just as with the veins on the legs and thighs, and the veins of the arms, breasts, abdomen and genitals, similar to their appearance in moist flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times these instruments are made of small blades like scissors from surgical steel according to this form; by which the vein is cut off when performed through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the mammary glands of men, which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some incisions are inflated in the mammary glands of certain men when they begin to feel itching during sleep, then the mammary glands are inflated and assembled from women's breasts, and they become erect, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to do this, they should incise those parts with a sharp instrument according to this form, from the line B to the line G, then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medication, and then adjust both lips of the wound by stitching, and heal what is inside so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple recedes from its position and becomes softened by its magnitude, as is customary in women, then it should be incised into two parts, above the pus, in such a way that each part contains the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form of the line .B. and .G. And then remove the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and administer what has been said about sutures and powders, as is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision as required for the pain of the illness and due to the flow of pus, then you should fill the wound with a corrosive liquid and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the grime, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	**Chapter .xlviii.**
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the piercing of wounds that leave a tingling sensation.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These wounds that leave a tingling sensation originate from the symptoms of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a pus-like substance.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those (wounds) that contain humidity, those with humidity should be incised during the new moon according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all that is in the wound has been evacuated, you should seal it with a strip of cloth and inspect it again the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage in place and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the wound from lymphatic node swelling and scrofula is, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about treating scrofula generally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread so that it causes putrefaction, then apply cauterization to it as we have mentioned above.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow or vein injury.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks and the string (or cord) is tightened over that which it struck, then abscesses are seen to occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is caused by an arrow, a long purplish mark appears on the body; and if you press upon the abscess, you feel a kind of hissing in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein returns to the general state of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Cutting into this abscess is a mistake, especially when it's left in the armpits, joints, back, and many parts of the body; it is very dangerous, so its cure should be avoided, and one on the extremities or head should be carefully managed.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Regarding those affected by the inflammation of the orifices of the bowels, they should make a longitudinal cut in the colon; then, with scissors, they open the cut and remove the bowels, and loosen the surrounding tissues until it is completely exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take the needle and make it penetrate between these parts, and open the bowel with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to urinate, drawing out both bowels located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the place between the two ligaments with a spatula until the abscess dissolves completely.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which the pus is drained until the ligaments fall; and take care to apply suitable ointments to this place until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you must have your hand over this place as far as possible from the abscess, and then insert the needle into the place that you had your hand over, and make it penetrate; and be in that thread double until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ointment according to what I said to you about the ointment of grapes from both parts and both extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you are afraid that the thread will break, then insert the fine thread with that needle through the entire abscess after making the first incision with the needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it has become that which is in it, then make an incision into the surplus of the cord, and leave what is joined to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice that you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the treatment which is made with heat and ointment until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter I of the hernia which occurs due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, when a hernia occurs in the rear and in the vein, it seems similar to a hernia occurring in the nerves when it happens due to their compression or excessive work, and for reasons similar.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the treatment is applied in the areas of the assistants or the leg, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And this hernia is severe, resembling the color of the other body, and it appears in their most vital parts; when it is tight due to strong intensity, the patient feels a stupor-like pain in that area.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And no additional swelling is present in the affected limb of the body, and for this reason the chain is left off, and it is painful throughout and does not move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have this in their joints, it is not covered with iron because the strong pain they experience will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One may use a chain or spike on the head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If there is little swelling, one may use scissors and cut off that piece from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang it with weights, cut it off, and close it up; treat the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 1.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section regarding the apoplexy which occurs from what happens in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Even some people experience swellings in the abdomen and other parts of the body which are similar to fungi, whose roots are subtle and the heads of which are large; and the edges of these are enclosed, and from them is derived what is small, and from them is magnified what is useful.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in the abdomen of that person there were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the edges of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from that continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise those and enlarge the opening in the foot, one side 18 millimeters and the other 6 millimeters.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the disease is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, with a subtle cut; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have hot cauteries in front of you to expel the pus, and if pus comes out, cauterize that spot.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious with incisions; instead, take a faithful plaster of fresh plaster, tighten it around that swelling, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust the tightness of the plaster's string; therefore, do not stop tightening the large plaster after it has separated and fallen off by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the part to be operated on is of a thick nature, in the incision there is no cause for fear or pain, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you make an incision into the mass and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of that, once the disease is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you should operate on a part that is of a dark color, with little sensation, and regularly protected by hair, for that is absolutely cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now come to the remembrance of remedies appropriate for these.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of hernia at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia at the navel is caused by various factors; either from fissures in the abdominal wall, through which the intestine or hernia protrudes, or from an excess of fluid (edema) or a constricted airflow as mentioned above.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the hernia protrudes, the appearance of the hernia will resemble the color of the body, and it is usually accompanied by severe pain, appearing in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the intestine's protrusion, the condition will manifest very differently, and when you press on it as we have described above, it may be hidden. In this case, return it gently; it is tightly stuck to its own place, and a lot of effort is required for its reinsertion, along with frequent baths and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	It may be due to moisture, it becomes hard and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or ruptured.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear as an abscess turning black and declining in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it accumulates according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it becomes hard.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the treatment for it depends on whether the hernia's protrusion is due to rearward wind, or a vein, or windiness; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for in that case there is great fear and danger, as is taught in the chapter regarding hernias caused by wind and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the sack, then instruct the patient to lie on their side and be stretched out; then apply pressure gently around the entire circumference of the navel at the place where you felt the pulsation; and command them to remain in that position between your hands on both sides of their body, and encircle a wide spatula around the circumference of the navel at the location where you applied the pressure; and extend the size of the hernia upwards from below with great care; and secure it gently around with a strong thread or catgut in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then, cut open the middle of the hernia that is extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that point where you feel the hernia; if you have constricted or guarded it by the ligament, then you will extract it forcibly and push the hernia inside towards the abdominal wall.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have constricted the sack, then take hold of it with your thumb and cut away the excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your skill or vein, surround that part, and then return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong fields and pass two needles through the loop you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which you make penetrate; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the place to heal until the flesh is extended and falls out by itself; or incise it when it has softened and is curable, and then treat that with something that covers and heals the wound.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover and tighten the abscess as we have said, and remove the pus or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter LIII** (If the text is structured as a book or chapters)
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the previous section, we discussed the types of cracks and the appropriate methods for their treatment using medicines, avoiding complications such as ulcers. We also spoke about the causes of cracks and precautions to be taken during their cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cracks appear in places where it is possible to completely eradicate them, such as in the skin or in the thigh, and even in other parts of the body, by removing everything, especially when they are just starting to form small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and deep, it may not respond to treatment, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has been successfully done for it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said: you must first prepare and cleanse the patient from black choler in some cases, and then cut out the crack if a clear protrusion is observed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for surgery, making incisions that cover these areas; and carefully hollow out from all parts with a good knife so as not to rupture any cause of the hernia's pain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And then stop the bleeding without causing further injury, press the areas, and wash out the copious blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it is against your will to make an incision of a large vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then take care of it with the other remedies as it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the types of hydropic water and the signs of each species, for their cure by medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with fire is only the species of ulcers, and not approached with fire to the species of tympanitis or the species of hypothermia, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydropic tympanitis with medicine and do not confirm your treatment, consider, for if the disease has already been weakened in the patient, or it is that other malady, another hydropic illness, just as in those of the throat or stomach and similar to them, then beware that you do not treat them with fire, for fear is upon that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you encounter a patient with vigorous vitality and the illness is only hydropic, not another malady, and it is neither old nor young, then the manner of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and apply appropriate pressure to their abdomen with your hand, squeezing out the water at the opening of the anus, and take a pointed spatum according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is of two sharp parts long, with an acute tip as with a spatula; nevertheless, it should be in him in some brevity little by little, so that during the operation this does not enter into the cavity and causes harm to him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrops is from hernias, for when you cut along the section away from the navel by the amount of three fingers in the gaps on either side, to the right and left of him.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrops is due to illness of the intestine, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the mass, then your section should be at the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not cut your section over the side on which the illness wishes to be, so that the superfluity does not flow to that place painfully.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then carefully perforate the entire chain with the instrument, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the chain and the bladder, and excise it; if it is the size of a fingernail or similar.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the bladder so that the spatula reaches the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then remove that one and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a delicate silver tube; made of silver or bronze or lion's metal, in which from the beginning there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and the end of it is cut according to the shape of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately rest on the instrument, thus evacuating a small amount of water at a time, for if you evacuate more than necessary in one go, severe harm may befall the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer a sudden death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May you evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what your disposition of the patient's virtue of the pulse of his leg and the goodness of it dictate.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then, after removing the instrument, take up the water which causes it, as often it is retained by the cord which holds the pus from the head of which you have extracted it; I recommend to you that you pierce it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And you should repeat the use of the instrument another day if the disease tolerates it, extract a small quantity of water from it and make this happen for several days in fear; be careful not to remove all the water at once.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the disease and remove a great quantity of water, then cure it by burial in sand, wash it with water and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines as long as it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and press and extract the water, as I have described in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XXV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with imperforate urethras.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some of the children are born with excretion from their mother's abdomen, and the opening of their mix (urethra) is either too narrow or not in the correct place.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is important to address the imperforate urethra as soon as possible after birth using a delicate and subtle method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a delicate lead or iron clamp over the opening and secure it with a thread, for three days or seven.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him do so and then return.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the area will not heal this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one whose pain is intense should be treated with lead claws, as we have said, for too many days without relief will only worsen it.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it is said, which causes these people, whose nature is cold and susceptible to injury, are subject to the end of the shameful head of the weapon, so that they cannot urinate during their movements, as long as they raise the weapon with their hand above them; and this is not due to their generation, but because their semen cannot reach the mother according to its rectitude, and it becomes a motley disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of operation on it is that the malady be turned towards his side, and then extend the head of the stone with your left hand by vehement extraction, and cut off the head of the stone at the place of the perineum with a sharp knife, as if you were making an incision with a feather, or any other instrument, so that the middle part of the stone comes out resembling the head of the stone and falls into the proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware, in your operation to remove the gangrenous flux, for what causes it to happen; hold it with what cuts off the gangrene, and cure the ulcer within so that it becomes healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albament that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis, and of the corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motas visible occurrences happen to this Albater on the scrotum and are an elevation of raw meat.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it requires that you suspend it subtly and remove that one entirely; then place your hand on the affected area with a kind of Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure it with refined ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the Albater (testicle) is malignant, then you must understand that you administer cautery near its incision and ration it accordingly.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the Albater (testicle) is within the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one testicle is inside the foreskin while the other is outside, then you must hold the inner testicle at its beginning until it is healed; and when you treat the outer one, be careful not to damage the foreskin during healing.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And they examine the genitals and the dark, inflamed prepuce, so that you understand everything that has become discolored, is corrupting, or is already corrupt; then apply a line to it with honey mixed with flour from crushed millet and dried herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And apply treatment to that as if it were another cure, as long as it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a need for bloodletting, then administer cauterization monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	This cauterization is beneficial for two purposes: it aids in bloodletting and in the plague when it is corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely in an instant, then understand that you must insert a platinum tube into the inner part of the prepuce so that the discharge from the malady flows through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess), carefully scrape off the spatum with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must scrape off the spatum from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when thin, is easily pierced by its own delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then carefully separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, which has already been soaked in water to prevent further adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a cooling agent while it is still fresh to prevent further inflammation.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own operation and our own will, and it is done on infants, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the lightest loss possible for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of their free peoples, since they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired by experience the cause for which I have granted the greatest part of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new blade and with fire; they use lint with wool and incision with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and do not find a better purification than with scissors, lint made of wool, which is superior to purification with the fingernail, because the seal of the prepucium in two layers, the outer layer being left, and the inner layer being forced to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification which is done by alpecaty, and it is digital, of which surgeons use, is not safe for the incision of the end of the male member, because it goes deeply into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In surgery, a strange creature, deeply rooted, can easily disobey your operation and corrupt it.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the scrotum of a child is small by nature and moves in such a way that it does not require purification, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the purification that is done with scissors and thread, my experience has revealed a truth: because the scissors are of appropriate size for the incision, the sharpness above is thus equal to the sharpness below; therefore, when you apply your hand with provided proportion, make the incision according to comparison in one moment; it is done with compression of the thread in a shape containing the scrotum from every angle, at which point no error occurs.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you must position the child mostly if it is one of those who understands a little, do not do anything but tie the thread to its hernia gently, and leave it to heal on its own within a day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make that person happy, in a way that suits their understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And make sure to be prepared with everything in place and not gesture; hide the scissors in your hand or place the thick foot cloth so that the child does not see them or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the hernia of the patient and blow into the crevice, pulling until the head of the hernia is exposed, and clean it from any impure substances.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then close the site where the thread is tied by folding it, and tie a small knot below it with a second thread, and place your finger over the site of the thread and point to the location of the ligament beneath, and cut between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then gently raise the blade, removing the head of the wedge; and drain the pus slowly and gradually, which is better; and sprinkle powder upon it and place a cloth on which fresh lard has been spread over the wound; and repeat this process each day; and treat the illness with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for amputation, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One end should not be sharp and the other should be, leaving no part of the claw uncut, and both edges should be of equal length to two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The error in amputation is because too much force is used, which escapes the intrinsic tension of the flesh, or you must make an incision without breaking it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, know that you must extend the one from your finger towards the place of amputation and make an incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a pince and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and they observe that the swelling is left from the inflamed hernia, then you should leave it until the hernia retracts on its own, and excise it easily, incising it as best suited to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful regarding the top of the hernia, as it will not be visible.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, care for what consolidates the pain from the powders we have discussed in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the scrotum with appropriate care and follows the contours of its parts, then this will not be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And may cure be given to what we have said so that it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an increase of pressure from either stones or a frozen uric acid, or by obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those we have mentioned regarding the methods of cure in the previous section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine cannot be released and the retention is due to a stone already in the bladder's neck, then the patient must be turned onto their side.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on their side and stretch their abdomen away from their back, and let the patient tighten their abdominal muscles as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted, it prevents the expulsion of urine from the kidney into the rear parts, so that the urine is passed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said, then the cause of the illness should be addressed, and you must administer extraction from it using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: Both silver and thin as a lion's claw, with a needle of fine hair like a quill and half as long, to which a thin cane is attached at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of urination through this method is to take a folded string and tie it at the end of the tube or handle for good suction; and insert the ends of the string into the opening left by the syringe, and cut them with scissors if any excess cause problems from the string, but rather insert them firmly into the cannula with force. And then attach the syringe to the border and to the white of an egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cease the pain over the bed, and open the bladder of the patient and wash it with oil mixed with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the scalpel with ease so it reaches the root of the ulcer; then fold the ulcer towards the opening of the wound; then push the scalpel from that side; then push it until it reaches the bladder, and make sure the ulcer is removed entirely to its source, and not in reverse order according to this procedure, but rather the meat in which there is deformity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the urine flow slowly as the yarn dries.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Remove it and use the scalpel for urine cure, do not stop until the bladder is emptied and the ulcer relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder cleansing with stone and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration, abscess, or inflammation in the bladder, and you wish to drain water and medicine from it, you use an instrument called a stone (clampcedra), and this is how it is used:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but if its opening is blocked, it is completely closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	It has three parts: two of one kind, thus as it drains.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is made concave, which is what is pressed, and its quantity should be such that it fills that part, any addition being unwanted. As long as some cause pulls away the humors from there, they should be removed, and when they are expelled, they should be thrown away to the stone (clampcedra) that has naphtha applied in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the clapper into the moisture and draw out that water which is pushed away from its cavity, for moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clapper.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the clapper into the urethra as we have recommended in the surgery; and drive out the moisture by pushing, for that moisture will reach the bladder soon, and the disease arises from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The delicate form of the crystal that the bladder is covered with, and this is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or metal, of which the head resembles a small feather, and it leaves the cane within the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder by motion, and place it in the humidity that you wish to crystalize in the bladder, and tie it with strong double ligature of thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the chirurgeon's tool into the ulcer.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then apply your hand to the bladder with pressure to release the moisture or tension within, as long as that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then pierce it throughout its roundness; and insert the tool firmly into those passages, turning them as needed; and add the cloth, thus forming a bag, so that you can collect the moisture and fluids.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie it off with the instrument as you did with the bladder, and press your hand against it to ensure that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXX (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	From the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention with a knife.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they have so described it in detail, both expounding and summarizing.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones formed in the bladder most often affect children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the disease burns its verge, causing frequent pain, and it becomes hardened; and thus it tears the body into pieces.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And healing is easier for children of that age who have reached 13 years, while it is a difficult cure for the old ones.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	The cure for the old is more difficult because of what exists between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to achieve the cure for that condition, we must begin by changing the disease with Christ, who extracts all the gap that is in their intestines; because that gap sometimes prevents the stone from passing after its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then take the disease from his feet and position and massage it gently so that the stone descends to the bladder's opening or sometimes it jumps from place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make the cut between your fingers, prepared, and leave its things aside, so that the bladder is completely emptied and declined towards the parts left open.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then take care of all those wounds, both deep and superficial.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the pressure in the space, then cut into it with a sharp tool.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove the tight object completely, then apply oil to the small finger of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or an adult young person, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And press the stone until it stays inside, where it was found.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that opening into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that part as I have said before, and expel it from the body outside the place where you cut it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And then command the minister to press the vesicle with his hand; and command another minister to extend the legs with his right hand above them, and with his other hand to hold the cord which leaves the legs, starting from the place where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a sharp instrument into the wound, which has this form.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And it cuts into what is between the thigh and the legs, not in the middle, before reaching the left side; and make the incision on that bone, and follow the natural line of the bone, making a transverse cut, so that the opening outside is wide and narrow inside, according to the amount that can be extracted from the bone without causing it to break, because the true nature of what is within the bone must be considered, and not its weakness.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that there is a certain stone which has angles and margins, so its extraction becomes difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that it is like a lion seed, round, and has a difficult extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that one which has angles and margins, insert it into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if this is not possible, then cover what you have over it, or tighten over it with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is as sharp as a lime, over which you tighten on the stone, and do not let it slip from your grip; or insert a subtle instrument with a curved extremity between them.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then widen the opening a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off tightly with a hot iron triangle.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your finger into the bladder's opening and cut it; then gently press a little inside; and seemingly, make them break into more than two parts.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is advisable not to cut it but rather ignore it, as this causes two problems for the patient: either it stops (the stone) or it leads to the continuous discharge of urine, because the affected area is not yet fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	You may administer the expulsion of the stone from within, or use a device with scissors to break it and extract the pieces through the patient's urine.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So, having completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place your hand upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in warm oil and water, so that the heat gradually subsides.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then gently turn the patient onto their back, and do not disturb the dressing for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the dressing is loose, wash the area with warm water and oil, then apply a mixture of honey and garlic internally and externally until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of this affliction, there is a danger of gangrene, clean and dress the wound, and it resembles a stone frozen in the bladder (and this is known as the retention of urine), then insert what is commonly called the "tying string" into the plague, and extract that pus, for if it causes the bladder to rot and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and apply it opposite to all kinds of things that are beneficial for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all stages of healing, ensure that you cover and adjust the things you have placed over the area, and apply the medicines that are being used on it.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the depths of the wound, and urine emission is blocked, then treat it with what you have recommended to prevent obstruction, because numerous attempts through this treatment are often associated with obstruction; and having already tried and exhausted everything, take a steel needle, which is the shape of this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	triangular pointed end, sharp, located inside the flesh.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take some thread, and tie the wound around the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the cautery, piercing it with ease until the point reaches the flesh.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then turn the cautery with your hand on that point little by little, and continue to pierce until you make the other side penetrate; for the urine will soon be drained.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over what is broken off from the flesh around the cautery's exit, for it is squeezed and drained of urine, and the wound is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not suitable for any reason, then leave a thread around the wound, and another thread on top of the wound.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then close the wound around that cautery between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then carefully loosen the lint and clean the frozen blood, which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to use fine thread to remove the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other thread above, otherwise, when the stone is loosened from its place, the urinary tract returns to normal and the pain subsides.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And this is necessary when you remove the stone from above, that you raise the urinary tract to its original position, or it returns to its proper place, and the pain subsides as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	There is little stone formation in the femur.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see any stone in those areas, the treatment is difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their secrets is that strong women often become weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second secret is that you will not find a wise woman who discovers the truth unless she consults a doctor when she is pregnant, or she is one of those women who have never been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third secret is that you will not find many women who know this art, especially the operation of delivery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth secret is that the place of incision over stone in women is distant from the place of the stone, so a skilled incision is needed, and there is fear in that place.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, call for a skilled female doctor, as they are hard to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking those, seek out a skilled and subtle doctor, or present a well-respected female midwife experienced in the ways of women, or a woman who has been trained in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So present this person, and command them to do everything you instruct, from inquiring about the pain to its onset; the reason being that they should ascertain if the woman is a virgin, ensure they insert their finger into her anus, and feel for the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If they find that, cut off what is causing the pain and then command them to insert something into it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and inquire about the pain, while also placing her left hand on the bladder, and examining it carefully.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, gradually massage that one from the orifices of the bladder to the parts below, adding warmth to its virtue so that it reaches that part at the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then insert into that position of the body's mass, at the root of the thigh where it is blocked, and focus on that part, ensuring the stone does not get caught below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be minimal at first; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the amount, knowing how much of the stone will be expelled from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and hard, others are large and sharp, some are smooth and round, and they lack points.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many parts there are in it according to what you intend to do regarding it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vinegar mixed with salt to the wound and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the channel where it is incrusted, then place powder on the spot and use those things like a pulley and descental stricture, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for in doing so, the malady will be stronger.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then apply the cure.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the swelling of the wound has decreased after a few days, and the area is suitable, then you return to your operation while ensuring that the stone is completely removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white cavity, which leaves the opening of the generative organs containing the testicles, and it is called the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural pouch that prepares itself for the departure of the testicle, as long as it is a separate testicle; and it is the opening of the generative organ between the white cavity we have mentioned, and this is not a hernia but a twist.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, as this matter is discharged into them, and sometimes it occurs due to impact made on the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it either declines to citron or sanguine, or red, or is black and filthy, or is white and watery, and it is that which is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white flesh that we have spoken of, then the swelling becomes round, declining slightly in length, with a figure like a bow, and the muscle appears, since the humidity is present from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper fat layer, then the swelling becomes round and separated from the muscle, and thus one estimates that it is another muscle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if moisture is between the bones of the spine and the white muscle, then you will feel pain.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you wish to know the color of the moisture, then expect the color of the moisture in the place where you encounter a hard crust; and according to what is observed in the trace of the crust, judge what is contained within it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of the hernia, you should know that it is commanded that the patient be made to void their bladder if possible, and then turn them over.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place the patient on their back for any reason, even slightly, and wrap them with a cloth.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow the right side, extending their finger from one to two fingers' width at the spine's joints and the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then carefully take a wide cut along the middle of the ligament, extending it from the inner side of the thigh towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the second cut according to the same measure, at a distance from the line you have drawn through the flesh of the genitals, reaching the white bone thoroughly.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And extract it, observe and take care so that you do not insert anything; your incision should be deep enough to completely remove it, and carefully examine the wound according to its extent, as far as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then carefully pierce the bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the wound with scissors, extend the bone in both directions, and do not touch the ligament of the genitals, incise the bone in that manner as best as you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise it completely or into the flesh, especially its thin layer, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is a sure risk that the water does not drain out.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if during the process of removing that from its location at the time of your operation, you have completed the section of the dissection of the hip, then return inside it, and properly adjust both lips of the hip wound with sutures, and take care of it just as you do with other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must tie the vessels that are above the suspension, extract it, and care for it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water is added in two instances, then know that both are hernias; so incise that part according to what you have done with the other, and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then clean the wound, and enter the sections with a woolen cloth submerged in oil or olive oil; place another cloth soaked in wine and oil outside, and expand that over both legs and the wonder of the belly; lay them on folded sheets and poultices, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two sheets of cloth and stuff them with wool according to this pattern; apply pressure to the extremities where they are bound with dry wool or cloth, and add more structure in the crotch area of the pants, taking one extremity from the buttocks towards the legs, and the second extremity from the opening of the pant leg, and place two other extremities on each side over the thighs, and the remaining two on each side over the knees, and adjust all tightness in the crotch area of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with a knife; this is because you take a thin cut-wedge cautery and make an incision at that point on the legs, and then ignite it according to what we have recommended, ensuring that the white skin containing the fluid becomes exposed, and then take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek script.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that seal, and light it until all moisture is extracted.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the seal with scissors, and cut it with scissors, and cut it with a subtle cautery fire; incise it according as you can until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from the flow of infection, and better than an operation by sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you difficulty to use cautery in the time of sectioning or in the time of burning, or flow of infection, then understand that you must cure what contradiction arises for you through treatment which is appropriate to it as said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision as recommended; it is at this point that you must verify, based on what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you understand that you must sever the disease on a raised area, then puncture the abscess in the lowest part of it with a spatula, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is clear that the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area, press it tightly, and release it, allowing the water to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then take care of it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is opposition to the draining of water at that time, you perforate it: this is not done unless the white pannicle in the orifice of the abscess causes opposition and prevents the discharge of water; then place a pen or instrument into which the water from the cysts is drained, whose form precedes; or apply a small amount of pressure to the abscess.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns, and it is blocked after some months or around those times; and when it accumulates again, it is pierced in the same way as mentioned above, because the disease will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On hernias (fleshy) and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the operation of this hernia, great danger is incurred; therefore, in my opinion, its discharge should be permitted and it should be saved by a better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And they should remember the operation on those and the spices of the apoplexy.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it says that the apoplexy arises in the bodies of those whose veins are composed and this is done for various reasons: either by a sudden sharp excess of blood, which flows into the veins, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the apoplexy varies according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in itself, but it is a serious apoplexy.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very rare is the apoplexy that is fixed, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the bending of the arteries or by the swelling of those vessels, so that the memory of the apoplexy is already perceived, or by the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression with your fingers is enough.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this species a section is made and on the other meats; and you incise the tendon of the genius, then open the hernia from its parts, extract the white cicatricial tissue, cut the suspensory of the vessels, tie them, and incise the suspensory after cutting that of all the parts of the hernia.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hernia is already in those meats consolidated, then you must extract the hernia and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the joint, or between what is between the bones, you must dissolve that entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the adhesion is due to native flesh in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must dissolve everything that belongs to it, and extract the foreign body as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool saturated in rose oil and wine; and take care of it with other remedies as needed until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an aperture (hernia) enclosed by a sac-like structure resembling a bud and caused by the softening of the testes, making it difficult to move and walk due to the pain.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, great care must be taken regarding that from which it is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I note that they mention operation in that second according to which I perform the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you must cease the illness on a raised couch; then dislodge the suspender of the testicles from its place; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hand placed on the testicles that are proven guilty by the pain in the scrotum; and have those other ministers, and stretch them to their full extent with vigor.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then cut with a sharp knife through the narrow space between the vessels, as long as the vessels remain uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then extract from every part as we have said in the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double thread into them, fasten that one at the beginning of the place where the pain occurs, and fasten the other again at the end of their effects.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise them in the middle part according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the infection with a cure for other infections in which you wish to prevent the generation of vessels that do not drain well, as it is not harmful for this purpose.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it occurs that all the vessels are affected, then remove the testicles or tie them off so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels, and they become atrophied, or tie them off so that they do not grow young with these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdomen's wall extending from the blood vessels of the abdominal cavity, allowing the intestines to protrude through the opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be either of the abdomen or an outgrowth, and these two types occur due to various motive causes: a blow, sudden movement, shouting, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The indication of this, when it is due to abdomen extension, is that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly, and it is a protrusion completely within the cavity, as the abdomen compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of the hernia is when it is due to a rupture in the abdominal wall, which suddenly causes intense pain; and it appears as an outgrowth from the internal organs, and this is due to protrusion of the intestine outside the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the abdominal wall is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernia zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by pressure, and sometimes it runs in the abdominal wall gap, and here it is retained, and this greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this illness with herbs, caution is necessary, so that one should avoid the risk of complications in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on this is that you command the hernia to return the intestine to its cavity within your hand, and then place yourself between its legs, and elevate its legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then narrow the knife, which is the knife of the scrotum, at its attachment, and cut the scrotal cord entirely through; and place on either side of the incision two folds of the section as you need to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to cut, then make sure that from that point there is no further injury.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then carefully remove those bodies which are left beneath the scrotal cord, ensuring that the white, hard bodies in each part are exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into what is the testicle, where there is white flesh, in that space between the cord and the testicle, and between the second flesh, and thoroughly free it from the adhesion behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then gently grasp the testicles with your hand, extending the white ciphas with your left hand and lifting the right hand over the ciphas towards the scrotum; command the assistant to spread the legs wide apart, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with a full solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search for any of your sayings that indicate there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the hard white ciphas.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause for it within the patient, then press your hand on the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a thick, strong thread of nine parts, and insert it through the last of the ciphas, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is divided; and cut the extremities that emerge from the thread within four parts, and tie them to some figure in the shape of a cross; and attach to that the cipha of which we spoke, leaving the cord of the testicles firmly attached on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the linen around the joints and tie them tightly together so that none of the vessels can transmit any cause for infection to occur from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then tie another linen according to the first linen, at a distance of three fingers from it; and take these two linens from the crotch where the testicles are located, in the amount of their greatness, and cut all the padding according to the curve, and remove it from him.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the opening below the testicles, in order to drain the pus and cleanliness as we have recommended in what we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and place on the infection; and apply the linen we have recommended (and sometimes the white cloth is cauterized, as we have said should be done after incision for fear of pus flow, since this has been seen to happen), and leave the linen until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case of the patient is delayed, then water should be poured over it and placed on that part as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with another treatment for internal wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventous Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates a successful treatment for it except by force.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first step is to perform the procedure as we have advised for the hernia, which is to place the vessels close to the section with ease; and then dry the middle part around the abscess with something that causes it to heal, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the illness as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	**Capitol LXVII**
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, when the joints are dislocated as we have said, they protrude and expose the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not insist on questioning the cause of hernias to anyone at all; and if they mention one, it is often incorrect; and it goes away by itself in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the condition persists for a long time, there may be an opening in the muscles that allows the hernia to protrude into the thigh; this occurs due to the expansion of the muscle (as mentioned before), which weakens and relaxes the area, allowing it to stick out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cautery, as mentioned in the previous description.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is cured by cutting according to this method: for the hernia lies between your legs and then close the place of rupture of the eminence aponeuroses in a certain extent according to the quantity of three fingers width.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white string that is beneath the skin, inside it must be uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the prominent location of the string, and press it against the abdomen's point.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then locate the two prominent points on the end of the string's ray, and align them with one another using the suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull out the string's end, do not pry open or extend the hernia, nor cause any other issue as you must be well-informed about the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then attend to the cure of the wounds, and having incised the pus, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is solidified; for the scar tissue contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better at this location because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testicles is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and it is important to pay attention to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for those who are tasked with the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back, and to incise all the cord that is softened over the natural cord, and then properly adjust two lips in the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, in the beginning, to remove the excess of the softened cordage with three or four stitches and a secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the stitches; and carefully tend to the healing of the other ailments within, so that they are cured and the discharge falls.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of reminding you in this book, I will speak about it; and the remembrance of it is necessary only in two ways: one, so that when asked about its cure by those who encounter it, the physician may know; and the other, because we ourselves sometimes have need to castrate other animals for our breeding stock, just as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by surgical incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and manageable and allowing them to hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take those with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear to be affected by the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration by surgical incision, hold the animal and with your left hand, press on the cord of its testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie the suspension, and cut along each testicle with a section, between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut away that pus which you have removed from some place.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause over those of the brain, but the subtle illness that is upon the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this manner of castration, done by compression, is better because it leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then tend to the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one where there appears an issue with the space in the scrotum, in which case it resembles both male and female characteristics, including hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some times, urine flow from that vein in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is different: for the womb of a woman over the penis has two ovaries like a man's, slightly smaller in size outside, similarly to the vulva of a man and two ovaries.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is because you must understand the tight flesh between which the discharge of that [disease] escapes, and then treat it with a cure for other ailments as well.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, from whom urine flows from the vein in the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the testes is strictly related to natural causes, as it is affected and can be observed with care; in some cases, it is aggravated in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as in men, and pervades into coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, if you have an excessive accumulation of swelling in the testes with your hand or thumb, and it persists, then dig into it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop digging until you reach the root of the cause, especially in the painful area, so as to avoid any flow of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And pay close attention to the treatment for healing the pain, as it is treated.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is born hidden within the body's folds, until it erupts outside, appears red and swollen (and for this reason they sometimes call it "chronic gout"); therefore we must incise it as we would a tumor, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Treatment of Goiter**
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Goiter is when the thyroid gland of the female is not properly opened or its passage is blocked.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental means due to a previous gout, or caused by improperly adjusted flesh, or subtle and thick deposits.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made either in the side of the mother, or on the ribs of her, or in the lower part of her, and it prevents conception and childbirth, and strongly prevents menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the womb, if the swelling is apparent, then it is likely; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it with your hand or with a mirror.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the swelling is very subtle and is felt in both lips, then you should cut and tear it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it should be placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers should indicate the pain in both places at once.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her limbs extended, and then force both lips apart until that subtle swelling is ruptured and the womb's opening is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and imbue it in oil, place it over the area, and apply heat to the spot daily so that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the tumor is large and thick, then cut it with a broad spatula or with a knife made of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for the flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and roots, prepared in an albumen of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead tube so that the plague does not harden less easily.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer water from the dry source.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated with other healing methods of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural state of other meats, and then you must cut according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene that is in the flesh does not cause any contradiction when cut in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail and red boils that happen in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of small veins, not from those that are larger; and when hemorrhoids have been old and dried up, they cause constant burning pain.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And already have I discussed in division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases cure is not made with fire.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the body over which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be careful that you place the woman in a reclining position, extend her legs with forks, or with a rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle upon those parts the flow of sacred smoke from one of the burning herbs, thus as with cassia and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision for drainage and remove the abscesses, stones, and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ore and comb it with honey, add wine, and make a plaster with this on the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess has drained, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages to the skin and make incisions on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in vinegar or in the juice of plantain or in the juice of nettle, mix with wine, and adhere to the place; and cure the place with a poultice until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the patient, who is of sharp mind, understand that you must do what appears to you according to my previous explanation.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which must be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	**Chapter LXXIV** (74)
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket during an accident in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special cases of abscesses that occur in the head include cracks, abscesses, ulcers, swelling, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhages, ruptures, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these maladies and their species, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise of amputation the cautery which you see used for the gangrenes which occur most frequently, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is performed with the iron, hear me.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, consider that you should evaluate if the pain of the gangrene in its beginning is sharp, accompanied by percussion and fever, and sometimes that darkening occurs and if you feel a certain sensation there, do not immediately resort to amputation, but treat it with something that aids the maturation until the acute stages of the events cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now know that you should cease the bleeding with a ligature which has two strands; recline the patient on their back and position their feet towards the opening below the abdomen, expanding their thighs and resting their arms at their sides, and tie some to this with suitable ligament.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the patient's head and administer the instrument with which the opening of the wound is made, whose form will be appropriate for those causes that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to use this instrument, be sure to hold the mother's womb with one hand, and ensure that the part of the instrument entering the mother is no larger than the size of her womb, and treat the malady.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the size of the mother's womb, then be sure to apply poultices over the texture of the mother's womb so that no part of the instrument can enter into the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And be sure to hold the instrument's edge with your hand, and the person administering the treatment should hold the instrument and rotate the edge until the opening of the mother's womb is fully open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation arises and it becomes hot and moist, then be sure to immediately clean that part with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the bowels are evacuated, you must place a cloth soaked in warm oil or olive oil containing some stimulants on the affected area, and apply pressure in the direction of the flow of the main vein.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then remove the cloth from the anus and place it on the penis, clean it with a cloth soaked in water containing lavender.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then the treatment is considered complete after two days, as long as it has healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of honey and water, and then immersed in water containing herbs like nettle or long-stemmed aristology, and finally, return to the previous treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the infection is deep within the anus, you must be careful with its treatment, following the method we have described above.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives the manner in which embrioic life should be preserved when it presents abnormally.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes the onset of natural childbirth by certain signs, and when she sees the woman struggling during labor and desires to breathe freely, she is distracted by the pain of delivery, and quickly prepares for the birth of the embryo, then you know this delivery is according to a natural figure, and it is the descent of the child on its head, or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will know that her abdomen is compressed so that the embryo descends slightly as it moves over its head, and it receives the second stage, and is free from those superfluities with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Anyone who is different in this part is unnatural and unworthy, for when the drunkenness is upon his feet and the body of him is before the head of him and his feet, or his hand is on his foot, or the head of him and his hand, or his belly, and strongly he turns himself over his spine, and resembling the figures of him are unworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all such cases, and beware of errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the features of these, and what ingenue is in those for it to be understood by that and to have stood upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is upon his head by natural effort, and he is vehement on the woman and it becomes a difficult part, and sometimes his virtue is already weakened, then that midwife should intervene, or what women have him, and evaporate the heat of him with fennel and moist olives.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then I carefully insert the catheter between their dilated and fractured spaces, and make a second incision or rather, through her nail, until I reach what is within of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And then I press the woman's belly as the child descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a mixture of chickpea flour and fennel flour to help facilitate the delivery.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then I command the woman, I prepare the herbs, which should be exchanged and made into a powder; and make her snuff it in both her nose and mouth for an hour, so that the child is delivered shortly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the child's legs are delivered at the beginning, then you must gently reduce those that remain, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her legs up, and position the mat on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the pains are not relieved and the child dies, then cut open those areas and extract the remains of the child or tie the body to the mother's breast with cloth and remove that equally, for it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the position of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is on its feet, then you should press those down, and gently turn the small body, and slowly take one of its legs and stretch those little ones out.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If he is sitting between the thighs, then command him to release himself, and make him cough up the condition, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then you return the small thing little by little until it takes on that second natural shape, for otherwise it will be forgotten again due to hasty treatment.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do everything we have recommended, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and grind it well in a mortar for a good percussion, and then apply the cone of the woman, the pus from the bottom of the patient's belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in boiled water, until the wounds are healed.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the wounds have stopped bleeding, then do the fumigation of mint and apply that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the fumigation for an hour, then you should stop it over a wound, and make him sneeze and open his mouth, and take away that, and press the lower part of the patient's belly with light compression, for the treatment will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the condition of their fingers and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition examines itself in this manner, then you gently insert your hands, one after the other; and the woman should be tilted over her back, with her legs down, and she should sit on the side, and complete the movements with her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the abdomen, slowly extracting whatever remains in the legs from the corners, so that it is ready for the release of the pus.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the condition is not released, then take the patient's legs and move them vigorously, pressing gently on the hips, slowly and carefully, until the condition can be expelled from its place.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and manipulate the condition slowly and carefully, commanding the woman to breathe deeply until the condition is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The situation of the patient's condition hangs sideways from one of his limbs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If ingenuity fails in reducing the swelling of the hand, then elevate the patient's leg and try again.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be reduced, then make the patient lie down, and beat the affected parts with a violent concussion, and then apply ointments and compresses that you know to be effective.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbearing arises, then make the woman lie down on her side, and carefully study the reduction of the swelling, engage in the act according to nature, and command the woman to cough deeply until the swelling is reduced.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The condition is over the collarbone, expanding the patient's limbs and the surrounding tissue to twice their normal size.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Nurse should have her hand on the baby's head and gradually turn it this way and that, so as to facilitate its birth.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it is soaked, then place your attention on the root of it, where we have recommended oil and mud.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then gradually command the patient to move their legs, and when you have done this, make them lie down on one side and command them to bend their knee, then command them to turn over, and do as I have said before, and let them sneeze in this position.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you observe the signs of labor of the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert your second finger into your own palm within, so that it is emptied of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the object is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, you should cut through the ligature so that it does not hold and choke.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently pull the object apart until it stops moving, and instruct the woman to compress it at regular intervals, and if God wishes, it will come out lighter.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Double birth or multiple pregnancy.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that twins can be born alive, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and rare; however, in most cases, they are not living. The causes may be natural, but it is not advisable.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And in these cases, even if they are twins, separate them a second time, and distinguish each one by cutting through the cord around their navel. Some births are successfully separated this way, while others remain attached and must be cut apart; this is a matter for another discussion.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some aspects of their condition prove difficult to treat and you reach the point we discussed regarding unnatural shapes, then care for them in the manner described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what makes it easier and subtler, and acts with delay, and is inventive according to every shape as she prepares him through skillful means leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have verified that a woman who has aborted once should not get pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes great harm due to the measurement of the wise doctors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this is in the science of midwifery that she knows well what to do with these young ones resembling that, and therefore she should be very careful about it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Regarding the removal of what is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead matter as we have discussed in the division of treatment and it does not come out without force, and you are compelled to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and free from any conditions that could lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now understand that the woman should be placed face-up on her back, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold both parts or be positioned on the bed to prevent his body from extending during the removal of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucus from elder, fenugreek, and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And the midwife places her hand upon those oils and bandages, then delicately inserts her hand into the womb, and carefully seeks the position in which the incisions are made on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And consider then if the fetus is ready to be delivered headfirst, and make the incisions in the appropriate places: on the feet, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or leave the beard, or on the fork of the fetus, or in the suitable locations along the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the delivery is to be over the feet of the fetus, then in the pubic area, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And take care to make the incision with your right hand, and pause the curvature of the fetus at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, delicately insert your hand, and position the incision in one of those locations we mentioned, aiming for the desired outcome.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold in the appropriate position another bandage, or the third if necessary, so that it attracts equally, and is not extended according to its rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And consider everything carefully, so that the projection of it is alleviated as is done in various cases when eradicating it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her chosen herbs mixed with oil and insert them skillfully into those areas where it is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the retention of the fetus is released, then the bands should be changed in place with another one that is better; and do this until all the fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is exhausted against the other and it is not possible to reduce it by pressure, then wrap a cloth over it; and extract that one until everything is expelled, and cut off that one at the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so you must also do with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the swelling of the hernia is great, or it causes constriction in its emergence, or it occurs at the head of the water-filled sac, then you must insert between the dense spikes and split the head and extract the water, or find that instrument called an "alundat", whose shape will be similar to other instruments discussed in the chapter closest to this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the hernia is naturally of great size: then you must cut that as with a ligature, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is firm and constricted, then it must be split so that the moisture in the foot can flow out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not violate any rules, then you insert the tip as soon as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the pain from the belly is apopletic or hydrophilic, then you must perforate that part which contains the moisture in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the issue is regarding their feet, then you must gently attract it and direct it towards the opening of the mother (or abdomen).
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is squeezed in the stomach and foot, then you must extract the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the stomach and foot where the moisture is present.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are frozen and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the opening of the mother (womb) is closed, insert your hand into the space between the legs, seek for the head, and pull it towards you, and insert one or two fingers into it, and pull it gently.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the opening of the mother (wound) is blocked by an abscess that occurs in it, be careful not to puncture it; instead, immediately administer an infusion of greasy moist substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; also monitor the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the injury is on their side, as much as possible, it should be incised; and whatever we have said about the living wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in the bones, and whatever is extracted should be removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be careful not to leave any cause within the wound after the second treatment.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur in the mother (wound).
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, descend into strict waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose belly was carrying a dead child, and now again over that fire another pregnant woman is placed, and the dead child is born from another fire.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him after a long time of hiding in his house; and the fire within him became so intense that he began to shake.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were first called to treat them, and you treated them for a long time, but the plague was not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should stop thinking about it from various causes and draw a strong conclusion, take an oss from him, and after some days another oss; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will consider that they are bones from the body of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, you will follow the plague, extract some of its bones, and remove the flesh from them in their proper arrangements, as it has been doing for a long time, curing itself with a small limb.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you should not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and aid to the doctor's art with his hand for administration of cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the shapes of the instruments needed to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the lever used to open the womb:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher in which the limbs are joined, to which two levers on either end of two feet are attached.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this virtue should be applied with great subtlety, either with hot or cold compresses.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each stick should be two fingers and the margin of both sticks should be one finger, and the length of each is half a palm; in the middle area between the two sticks, there are two adjustments made from that same stick, which are already tightened, their length is the greatest part of a palm and a little less, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional elements are inserted into the mouth of the hernia to keep it open when you apply the prescribed compresses on both sides.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of wood or metal, according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However at the extremity of his leg there are also two additions, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is about two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open them wider, you do so by bending the patient's body over the side, opening what is between their thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument, similar to shears, according to the amount you desire from the measurement of the mother's mouth, while the meter ensures it is as you wish.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness that the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing that it is being pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of friendship as it is contained in the great head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is constructed like forceps with teeth at the end, thus when necessary, and sometimes, it is made long like this with forceps in this way, thus when necessary, with teeth similar to those of a saw with which it cuts and sews.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of few remedies:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of an unguit (finger or toe) without a nail:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of an unguit (finger or toe) without two nails.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of pincers with closing teeth, where the head of the foreign body is cut off.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula without two ends, where the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments, when used in combination and with the addition of various spices, prepared as needed by the artisans, are more easily handled during operation and are more beneficial to people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not concern yourself with those instruments that are already ready, for the necessity of such should never be an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in a controlled manner, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it comes out, it is bad.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that does not help, take a warm drink and pierce the cover with a needle, placing it on the herb-filled mouth of the wound, with hot calamine, rhubarb, chamomile, and aromatic spices such as arabic gum and cassia wood, and holy thistle.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the drink, and that one placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canvas tube in the mouth of the wound, keeping it there until the evaporation goes into the concave part of the wound.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform the sneezing as we have said, and the second time, extract it with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is not effective and the pain persists, instruct the nurse to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of elderflower, then gently insert it into the wound and press. When she feels the second one, take it out slowly. Then, using the same method, introduce your hand as recommended, and when you find the second one, extract it little by little, according to need, so that the patient does not feel a strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Once it has been determined that the ribs must be moved to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so it will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's breast is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication from all herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all the causes we have recommended are forgotten, be careful not to repeat the abstraction in the same way, but know that what remains from it to the mother's breast is a matter for women, and then purify it with a remedy of herbs; for this will rot it within a few days and dissolve and disappear.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is seen that there is a bad odor from the head to the stomach, which causes harm to the patient, then at this point fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already employed inhalation of nasturtium and dried figs as a treatment.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	A device used to induce inhalation for the retention of menstruation and postnatal bleeding:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of iron or bronze.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end is placed in the pit and the broader end over the fire, with the inhalation pause over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	It should hold that inhalation until the effect of that fumigation is consumed, and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child's skin is smooth and its buttocks are not perforated, which has already been carefully cleaned and bandaged.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then show the midwife how to perforate it as she has said; otherwise, use a sharp spatula and be careful not to touch the ulcer.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then apply pressure over the infected wound immersed in wine and oil, and carefully prepare the ointment until it is warm.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is concern that it is too deep, then insert a tube into the wound for several days, and remove it when the child's fever subsides.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that the buttock becomes infected due to a wound or abscess; then, once that infection is incised, it should be treated with the same methods we have mentioned for healing and bandaging.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that have formed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that develop in the anus or in the space between openings are characterized by a discharge of pus, often accompanied by swelling and pain.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or a pustule.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is chronic and susceptible to moistening by white pus or subtle corruption, in some cases these are the origin of such fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these (fistulas) are known to be caused by substances that have exited from there through a passage and due to corruption; some times the patient's condition worsens, and very often they are infected by worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are found in the space between (organs), penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate between the joint of the thigh and into the opening of the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in cases where a known fistula penetrates into the anus but does not exit, you should insert the aforementioned finger into the anus and attempt to push or pull the fistula when it is not too tight.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is too tight, then insert the attempt of a gentle push or pull with your finger until you feel the tentation or the hair in the finger that you insert.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all or there is no sign of expulsion of worms or gas during the treatment, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrant and limit yourself to care.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the expulsion of urine from that area and the prohibition of urination until that location is medically solidified.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating within the joint of the thigh or within the bone and causes pain in circulation, its sign is that the pain penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and causes pain in the entire limb; and it will cause pus perpetually; and it does not respond to treatment, nor is it solidified with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure; the cure for those requires hard work and the sensitivity of skilled doctors who heal them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron tools is hoped for according to what you have been advised, and what you have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the illness moves between your legs over its bones and raises the patient's legs within them, the thighs are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then it inserts a probe of lead, or iron if there is stiffness in the fistula, at the place where you know the pain penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the heart, then you must insert your index finger into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel a sudden heat in the chest already for itself making itself known as discovered, or another thing that you feel between the chest and that sinus or flesh, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	They may still say that it is good for some people, although it may be harmful to others.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And as for the treatment by which recovery is expected in such cases, you must make subtle cauterization according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it circumvents the chest; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh parts around the fistula, which are adjusted like a plume of an ostrich's feather, have healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then carefully tend to those wounds wrapped in bandages so that all the attached flesh is thoroughly cleaned, and treat them with medicines that heal and strengthen the flesh, and if it heals well; otherwise, it will not heal in any time through other treatments.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the small intestine, but there is a space between it and the attempt, which consists of flesh or closed matter, then open a fistula in that place where the surface of the intestine can be seen, dry the intestines from the beginning of the fistula, and let the attempt dry too; thus, through the attempt, it will be freed and removed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then carefully change those fistulated meats that are attached to a hollow tube of foreign origin and not torn for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If the flow of pus appears between you and your operation when you think of those meats, then take a fine tool and cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire is good for both: it adjusts those meats attached and cuts off the pus by drying the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then carefully care for those with swollen or irritated tissues around the affected joint until the pain gets better, and treat the sore area with hot compresses to soften hard, inflamed, and consolidating tissue.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines which include strictness and restriction; when the pain is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already perforated into the anus and is protruding from the surface of the body, then insert a finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if the tumor is hard and between you and it there is merely a thin layer of tissue or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a matter of trust and hope through another method.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for which there are three methods: first, cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, drying it out until you can reach the cavity within to apply the cure; avoid any sharp incision because you do not want to puncture the sac containing the pus and cause further damage, and instead let the patient's own will guide the healing process; then carefully tend to that area as we have said, either by elongating the membrane and draining the pus collected below it near the anus, using a probe or another sharp instrument, or through an attempt or another device of extreme sharpness, and surgically close those incised fistular tissues wherever possible; and finally, make every effort to restore all the affected areas that were cut, and if the incision becomes infected and the fistula opening above remains unhealed, puncture it from the anus and let the pus drain out more gently for the patient's benefit.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body and at the margin of the anus, take the probe with a pointed end, which is thus prepared to pierce the skin in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert yourself into that wound enveloped in cloth or around those; and then, insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates deeply into the margin of the anus very close, then extract the probe from that passage as you have inserted the tip inside the anus; remove the end of the probe and align both ends, then open each one, leaving it for a day or two, and whenever you more deeply insert the probe into the flesh, open it when those parts of the flesh are cut between the two ends of the probe and they fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either with heat or cold, as long as it does not cause a laceration; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulam with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharp on one side and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cause unnecessary damage when you use it.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either they are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are as if with fat protrusion.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the sanch [or blood] flows from them at that time in one way, they are numerous, they leave the body, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are only open at the anus are according to few humors, of which citron water or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the body's color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to lie down and press until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then take care and suspend them with pins or what you have at your disposal, and return the intestines to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the pins are not held in place by the humidity of their intestines and the softening of those parts, then take a coarse cloth or woolen string and extract them with your fingers, and afterward cut them and sprinkle some powdered substances over them near the incision, so that they adhere to those places instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then crisp the malady with a small incision, wash it with water that is in the abdominal cavity and, gently, try to force it out when the hernia squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your hand or those with wax, and cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who perform the incision, know how to apply a suture to them according to this method: take the thread wrapped around and pass it through the needle, pull out the hemorrhoids from the openings above, and make the needle pierce in the opposite direction (from the other side), then wrap both ends of the thread on the side beneath the needle, slightly away from it, and tighten the hemorrhoid with a strong stretch, tie off the thread, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do it all at once, leaving none of them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place your hand on the cloth soaked in hot oil or wax; press it against the affected area and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that cloth and, when necessary, treat the affected area with ointment or other remedies until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Various occasions arise due to the drying out of fissures or the constriction caused by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these fissures are old and do not respond to that treatment, you will need to use a pointed instrument or your finger to moisten them and express the purulent discharge, which prevents their hardening; then treat them until they are hardened.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should apply those remedies with a strong reason, as the first enters that causes pain and becomes inflamed; and then take care of those that need to be healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernias is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia, it is crucial, and it is not recognized if it does not appear according to the color of the body, resembling a bone head, and it occurs throughout the body and most notably in the groin and sides, and for these pains you should pay attention.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so it is necessary to incise what is in the region of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its place; and then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, apply cautery as mentioned previously in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May a verruca be a small, rough, round ulceration on the surface of the body, often appearing in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or to open it with a sharp tool or within a container.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical tools.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And such warts are eradicated with the instrument you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mouse (formica in this context) is a small, feigned or fistulated lump on the body's surface, often appearing red, and when pressed, it feels like a mouse bite, affecting the area around it.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from a bird of prey or a serpent, make it strong, and press it onto the mouse among the circle of the needle; then turn your hand over the needle as you cut what is in the path of the needle, and place it on the flesh at the point of the mouse's origin, eradicating the mouse from its source.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a tube of horn or iron in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforated), wrapped around itself so that when it is positioned over the affected part, its movement is not hindered.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned above in the chapter on cauterization, do so according to the method described for cauterizing a wound.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments used for administering cryotherapy.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cryotherapy is administered using silver or iron tools that have been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those used for the treatment of small children, and for those who have a weak or sensitive constitution, the cryotherapies should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The method for making a large and few incisions:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The upper part of the bag should be wide according to this manner, and its distinction is where the bag is tied in the first place with several times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth (not covered) with lion's fur, gently attached; and on one side of its length there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel depends on the thickness of the rays and can be slightly narrowed.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which animal bladder or sheepskin medicines are stored should have a length of one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated through many channels, as it is twisted; and the space between the channels should be as thick as said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then carefully insert into those channels a strong thread of crude gall, or surround them with it; adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is paused in its place, tighten it at the top of the channel between two distinct points at firm compression, and carefully fasten that channel: The quality of fastening that channel is to fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then have the patient lie on their back, elevate their legs on either side, and place a cushion under them so that they rest upon it; then apply the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar to the anus with ease, and have the minister take hold of the bag and squeeze it twice as hard as possible so that everything within the channel is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces vomiting, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps through it all night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you apply your knowledge to the solutions of intestinal problems and vomiting, and the condition improves, then you repeat the cauterization until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or fissures in the anus that cause pain, then use a gentle and subtle cauterization, with small instruments that children use to cut them.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already mentioned in the discussion of plague cure what suits the body, and you have also given the cure for some from both arts and medicine according to their perfection.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are produced by the plagues and according to the place on which the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which diseases arise are also diverse, such as the inflammation of a wound, or an incision of space or skin, or striking with a lance, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those disease-causing factors.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The diseases that are in the parts of the body can also be such as a plague which strikes on the head, or the collarbone, or the foot, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain diseases to stop that reasoning and regulate over other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with simple diseases of the head, since the remembrance of the compounded ones will come at the commencement of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to tension or similar symptoms, and the patient has already taken enough medication and it is a severe headache and you fear the progression of the disease towards abscess, then you should immediately perform a cerebral puncture and drain the fluid, and do not delay; extract the pus from the sinus according to the amount of virtue in it if there is no other contraindicating cause for a cerebral puncture, especially if the sinus that has formed from the headache is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And cerebral puncture is the opposite of the treated condition; and attention must be paid to the patient's diet, as well as avoiding heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If, however, any cause prohibits the procedure, then reduce the diet and do not bring close meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the abscess if it is a cautious apoplexy, apply hot oil or wine in which the patient has been dipped to it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the abscess, then apply over it, if recent, its sanification and the air has not altered the powder which I will describe, then gently press.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already altered it, then apply certain ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the abscess is large or for the opening of a space and similar, and its lips are not suitable for sealing due to their condition, then adjust them by suturing according to what I will describe about their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the abscess is already exposed from bone and tissue, and it is not a retention but a small suspensory, then incise it and treat the abscess with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in place of the wound, and instruct the patient to abstain from foods that are coarse: fruits and vegetables and things of similar shape and appearance, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find a bone decayed and not attached to the flesh, cut off all the rotted parts and remove them, and then care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues are caused by an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not drained by medicines, then you should investigate the artery. If you find one that is not incised, cut into it with a knife, or tie it off; and if cauterization is required to prevent further discharge after draining the pus, do so.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause should be considered minor; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method for the powder is as follows: mix equal parts of oil from crushed cloves, dragon's blood, and unextinct caustics; grind it all together finely and fill the plague with it, compressing it tightly so that it sticks to the affected area, and coagulate the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it over the poultice and leave it, do not remove it while it is still wet, as medicine does not adhere to it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times it requires only this cautery, when there is no acute pain or inflammation of the dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is also carried out on large abscesses when it is appropriate to stop them from opening and tighten them, and they are fresh wounds with their own inflammation, whose air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has been altered, especially in summer, then you should not apply this poultice to its position but rather treat them with what we have said, either by placing a paste of herbs mixed with water and honey on them until they become rotten; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in a bone, and it is small, then you extract it with your fingers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And tell the treatment for fractures of the head that are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the collarbone.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the fracture occurs in the collarbone, its treatment does not differ much from other fractures; however, it is more delicate than a simple fracture of the skull.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the collarbone are injured, then, if it is a nerve, the treatment should not be aggressive but rather to avoid any cure that causes severe pain; thus, applying liniments and bandages as if they were vitriol, similar to those used for nerve injuries.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause on the plague, for the substance of the nerves is affected and its continuity to the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is to be treated with lighter medicines, then wash it with water twice, sometimes with rosewater or not, and apply heat when washed with water and the other remedies are applied according to this manner, and cover with moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then apply a suture, or tighten the lips of it, and return care to it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague is deep or occurs in it with a low-breaking pus, then pierce it in the most sensitive place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the plague an artery is already incised and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already incised the spine of the gutter or completely through, and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with sutures on the canal of the gutter and do not touch it; equalize it and return it to its natural shape, and then tighten that with decent tension, leaving it for a few days; and then treat it with ointment in which there is stiffness and excitement until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already taken hold within the bones, then pierce it, and if there are any fragments of foreign bodies, remove all that you can from them; leave what is not appealing to you within until the plague dies down, separates, and is removed from it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle that powder which has been recommended to you over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the plague has caused a fistula, then treat it with water from which the memory of its origin will come in due time, in its proper chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the plagues of the collar or similar, when pain strikes between the shoulders and is felt in space or at the edge or with a lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or a sword that caused the wound and the depth of it indicates a severe injury, consider more carefully if the plague has an open wound (or an ulcer) when examining the patient; then you will know that the plague is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the wound and the plague is recent, then you should apply powder to it in the first hour; do not tighten that bandage so as to prevent the pus from returning to the depths of the wound and harming the patient more, rather apply a poultice attractive to the wound, and repeat this process twice daily.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if a suitable poultice is not available, then apply cut vegetables to the wound's surface to draw out fluid; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the juices flow freely from it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the illness has passed three days or more without causing spasms or tremors of the heart, or tightness of the chest, and other favorable dispositions appear, you will know that the illness is cured; then treat those who are still ill until they are healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the illness is prolonged, and it remains open for a long time, you will know that a fistula has formed; then treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the illness is due to a wound or cut in the joint or muscle, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the illness has affected the bones, and there has been an incision in the joints, then you should compress the illness and pull out the detached parts, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, leave them as they are until the plague can be removed, for their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents affecting the other parts of the body, the young treatment in healing is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal ailments.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, or slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For severe cases, the intestine or hernia wall is seen, so that their intrusion and stitching must be powerful and precise.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And minor disruptions are difficult to achieve in another manner, and I note that their reduction is more difficult if you do not promptly introduce them to their place, as it opens and swells, making their insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is to lie down, for in this position it is not difficult to return the intestine to its place, as it is difficult with both of the aforementioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common to all other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures communicate with other wounds, but nonetheless they are more proper for the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it says that when the wound is small and there is no cause in the intestine for it to protrude, and it becomes difficult to reduce, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the lack of disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has become swollen due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this occurs, you should know that you need to soak that which you immerse in a sponge or cloth moistened in warm water, or take water with sand, or gravel, and wrap it around the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, they use a solution of vinegar and water, which is better than just water in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of aloe and mullein, for it removes the pain from it slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the pain is completely gone after this treatment, then cut the disruption with a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it does not involve cutting, and there is no need to apply excessive heat or starvation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the sharp sword, and the other part not sharp, and the tip is slightly blunt, but it's not due to lack of sharpness of the blade.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the hernia is enlarged and has protruded, it should be reduced to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the hernia is extensive and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is located higher up in the abdomen, you should raise the patient's head and foot higher than the hernial openings.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should pause your intention and consideration for a moment so that the opening in which the disease is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is that you must administer this in both great and minor ailments.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in minor ailments, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine be administered between your patient's thighs, where it has its origin entirely in their hands, and adjust the lips of it, and then carefully examine from one side to another, seeking any cause that might be hidden, other than the suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then lay it near the extremity of the tear on the little finger, and tighten the needle once, but do not insert both ends of the thread into both extremities of the cord, leaving the cord free within, except that you cause the thread to penetrate from one side to the other; thus you have added both extremities of the cord and both extremities of the phalange, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then carefully tighten the thread double around the needle, sometimes from both sides together, and add the two lips and the wound by a decent addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and attach another needle to it, just as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have filled all the contraction of the wound with needles.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the finer needles cut into the flesh more gently; and the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the skin, hence it is necessary that they be both fine and coarse.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is necessary that the needle be placed in both ends of the hernia gently, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the hernia opens before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the stitches should not be too long so that the hernia is not blocked from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient during their sleep; place pillows over the incision on all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the disease is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of suture have needles in a certain way that is most convenient for small wounds, where just one needle or two are enough to close the wound.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second type of suture is as follows: you administer a suture to all four extremities, from the tailbone and two extremities of the thigh, at once, with an needle in which thread is tightly wrapped, both in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, return the needle to its original entry point from which you began, so that the thread retracts and draws the wound closed, making the suture like a drape in which the drapes are tightly bound.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, apply enough of the poultice to the thicker part of the finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And I have used this stitch to treat a man who had been struck by a sword in his belly, where the wound was about the size of a palm and located around two palms below the navel; it was a rupture in the middle part of the intestine. And after twenty-four hours, I reduced that swelling that had formed due to the wound.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed completely within fifteen days or so, and he was cured. And I treated him for many years, and he lived in good health.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; yet by chance, for you see, I did not use any poultice or medicine on the wound, but simply applied warm compresses twice a day with frequent washing of the area in honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of suture according to the account of words.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin to suture the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore, as the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to its rectitude and length throughout the body, leave the tip of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the other side, from inside out, into the other end of the member.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the needle penetrate, make it penetrate again into that same endpoint of the member from inside out; leave the tip of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the opening from inside out.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration by which you cause it to penetrate into the body at the end of the mirror, which is in its opening so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin with these cuts on the side of this organ and cut with that end which is from the body, in the other side opposite to this mirror's extremity, through which it penetrates, and reduce it back into the cavity, and with the end of the instrument against this other extreme of the mirror; then extract from the needle which is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do it again and again until you have closed everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this manner of stitching is that you stitch with a skin stitch, by which I mean stitching the flesh, once from the side of the end of the needle, and then in the other direction until it is completely closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of suture, which is truly called Gallic, and this is of speech about it and for its reparation, is that you sew according to the second layer to which some physicians sew it, thus adding all parties to its natural party; and apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of it, and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you have your repair.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take care that you keep the needle at the extremity of the mirror in your hand, and make it penetrate the layer inside in that sole, and leave two extremities of the cipher; then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in both extremities of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn back those threads, and make some of the layers penetrate from inside to outside in both extremities of the mirror other than the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which precedent remembrance is made.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they may say, "The stomach suture is corrected with two needles; then you insert a thread into some of these, and begin to introduce the needle from which the thread comes, and make it penetrate within the other side opposite the sutures of those which are joined together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which causes, when you perceive the new plague in the presence of its discharge that alters the air, and reduce the intestine and sew it up and prepare it properly, then pause over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, place your hand on that area, burning the engorged parts present until they harden and discharge pus, and become healed and improved; and then treat that wound as is done with other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the necessary medicines on hand, then focus on this treatment as soon as possible, since it begins to get better with warmth, compression, and changing positions twice a day, just as it has been taught to you, until it heals, so that you do not need other types of medication for simple ailments.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate with other parts of the body, then cover it with lion's wool soaked in high-quality oil or olive oil and place it on the areas between the angles and leave them like this.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in the intestines, since it is seen to worsen, then apply a black, stiff-knotty vine to it, especially if the inflammation has been caused in the intestine and it is felt to be protruding from its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that hernias in larger cavities heal more easily than those in smaller ones.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And the hernia called "gugnu" is difficult to heal because it does not receive treatment from any plague that strikes it; this is due to the large number of veins in it, the magnitude of those, the subtlety of the body of that part, and the nearness of it to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the plague is the fabric, and you manage to clean it, reduce it according to your method, which reduces hernias equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has spread to the space and turned red or black, then tighten the thread over the area that is discolored from it, in order that pus flows out, for there are veins and arteries in the fabric.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut into this, which is another kind of membrane, and place two extremities of the bandage hanging from the part where the hernia has been opened, so that by pulling on the fabric and the emission of the hernia's arm, the attraction of it will be alleviated.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of hernias when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it is possible for some people to have it restored, as you will see that which was previously plagued in their stomach by the lance and was the plague on the right side of the stomach, it was an old plague with a fistula, and had issues with digestion and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you should pursue the treatment for it as if it were not confirmed in the healing of the hernia, but rather focus on the internal area that ignites health and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having observed the location already consolidated, understand the disease you are dealing with in him, and do not disturb any further this ill-accidental event in his belly; and do not force anything for this ill accident, break up its healthy dispositions by eating and drinking, and soon immerse it in water and exercise it as it says.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when this plague in the intestine is small, it should be tied according to this manner: you take a hook of great size; then adjust both edges of the plague and place one hook from those that open mouths over both edges of the plague; therefore, when it is taken hold of those and tightened its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another hook near the first, and do not stop doing this until you have made enough hooks for all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return it and close the plague; break off those attached heads within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia is thin and delicate, made from the hernia of an animal, finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernia fibers, completely naked, and close the end of them with a needle, wrapping it, and insert that fiber into the needle and stitch with it, and return that to its rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the disease is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it requires careful treatment, for there is not a simple cure for it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the cure of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every wound and abscess that hardens and ages becomes a ulcer, and it is not healed and persists for a long time and does not disappear, then, in any member, it is generally called a fistula, and we call that our wound.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula is, in truth, a cut that is hard, white, and without pain, and has a concave shape just as it does with external wound; for this reason, they call it acute pain, i.e., disease.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people's bodies a moistness that burns; and often the moisture is discharged in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce, and sometimes it is thick, and sometimes it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said it in the division, when you mention the plagues, that every ulcer which does not heal or is not on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: among which the first is due to a lack of blood circulation in the body; or due to evil spirits; or because between the ulcer and the skin there is hard, prohibitive tissue; or it is due to excessive weight; or because the ulcer itself becomes infected and the material that remains is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inappropriate for its cure; or when corruption spreads in the region, and there is a plague; or because of the nature of the region, as is the case in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of ailments occurs, and it takes a long time to heal an apostema naturally; or because there is a bone or many bones involved.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It has already shown all those causes, their signs, and the cure for them through medicines in detail.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so, I will now tell you the cure for a fistula that is caused through surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas penetrate great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skin, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal bones in the back, or any of the joints composed as are those of the hand and foot; and from those arise fistulas close to the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, of these fistulas, those following this manner are among the illnesses of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if the depth of the fistula does not allow access to these places that are mentioned, and you await and rely on its healing, and you wish to come to an understanding of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, question that part with them.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that part with a delicate probe, for the weight of their body's flesh is lifted and bent to straighten the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not within your power to mean anything about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then purify the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you purify that one must also be applied to the other orifices and their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you must inquire most carefully, according to what manner it is within your power to know if here you find bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or immediate, or it is a fistula that only has an horrible odor and lies entirely within your strength, with all of your questioning, questioning the illness, and finding the cause of the pain through your compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs and accidental causes in the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered and ruled out all those causes, you will see the cure according to your knowledge: for you consider whether it is a fistula appearing near or far from a joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in one of the places that are characteristic of you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	You then examine the fistula according to what has been said in its description, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and cure it where it originated, whether in an opening in the flesh or from tissue and similar things, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and is accessible, you should incise it as deeply as possible with your knife, and clean it of all corrupt flesh; then wrap some linen in sharp medicines and insert those into the cavity of the fistula that you have understood through the incision.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this as it has been seen that sharp medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore those that apply heat, which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to be certain about this, then you should examine it and dry it as we have recommended; but do not neglect any cause from veins or nerves or from major limbs, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackness, then cauterize that until the corruption is entirely eliminated; and then tend to the flesh on it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healed and discharged in this way as it should, you will know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; then uncover it again and carefully perform the reason for its healing and purification with the last strength you have, and restore it accordingly.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that that corruption is in the deep, distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and so for you there remains nothing but to cleanse that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is within your possibility to throw it out, then you throw it away with subtle forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause for concern in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of discomfort arises from the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise these ties or flesh if they are here, and dislocate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to separate the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the affected area so that the pain reaches the bone, but do not allow it to penetrate beyond the muscles and ligaments, and be careful that the pain does not become chronic, and ensure that the incision you have made during the operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Previously, if you are hesitant, apply a hot compress or one soaked in Egyptian oil, or any of the green oils, because when these ties and ligaments are softened by them, the bones can be separated more easily, and this attraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the femur or thighbone or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then quickly apply this medicine just enough behind that dark and corrupted area, and soon restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part that is corrupt is extensive, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to completely cut out that part within the area where the corruption has set in, and then cure it once it has healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to hold that in place, exemplifying and assisting with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the source of the pain is a separation within the body, specifically within the muscle tissue of the leg, before it reaches the thigh, and it is due to a severe infection or abscess, not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore, the duration of his suffering increases due to the error of the doctors, as the abscess becomes severe, and it causes hot, horrible ulcers on his body, all filled with pus and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then a multitude of doctors have been studying this affliction for about two years, not focusing on the sap but on the art, as you have been called to do so.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the hernia and the matter flowing from it through the entire body; and already the condition of that man was completely rigid, and the color of him was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then he inserted the probe into one of those hernias and succeeded in bringing the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then he carefully examined all the hernias and found those that were causing problems from every part of the hernia.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then he carefully cut and incised over one of those hernias until he discovered a separation in the bone, and he found that part corrupted, and it was already hard and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the hernia had already penetrated and entered into the mesenteries.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And I then paused the restoration of the illness with consolatory medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I then iterated and re-exposed the bone according to the initial discovery, and I found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I secured what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I had made it perforated in order to effect its cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I exposed it again and did not attempt to cut the bone in one piece but made incisions little by little and performed its restoration, and it was not restored until I had extracted some of its marrow, and then I restored it using medicines, and it was somewhat consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And further intervention in the operation of excision is not necessary unless for the arrangement of the hernia's folds and due to the lack of patient tolerance and fear of death, as it becomes unconscious at all hours due to excessive evacuation syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed by complete cure, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its disposition in the body is well arranged and restores its virtue; it is guided according to its dispositions and does not cause contradiction in walking or harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is a prominent bone in the body that causes trouble, then you should do this according to this method: take a strong ligature and tighten it at the end of that prominent bone, and ask someone to stretch it; make the second ligature slightly thicker than the first one; then bring it close to the flesh left over by the bone, and extend its tip so that you can pull the flesh away from the bones, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or table beneath the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be careful that the sawing over the corrupt place is done little by little, because if the corruption is within the bone's concavity and does not appear in its sensation, it may require another cut.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it is often a continuous break from one side to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or at a side, then you must expose the flesh from all parts; and place a stick beneath, and saw first the part with the initial break where the corruption has entered, until the other break is also exposed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in a joint, pierce that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in them according to reason but by contrivance.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, open that up, and remove it according to any disposition possible for you, and in such a way that, when it does not cause you pain or affect nerves, it is rectified.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know that there are various saws and chisels for cutting bones, depending on the position of the bones, their preparation, thickness or thinness, and rarity or hardness; so it is necessary for you to prepare a suitable instrument for every operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you stand in need; since you have great study and long experience of the manners of this art, and are a witness to the ways of ill health, for when you have already tried these things on yourself, it is fitting for the instruments for every ill.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will be taught the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed to your restriction, which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the form of a starred key, and its points are in the form of barbs.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable to tighten the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is too wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the major scalpel compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the minor scalpel:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of the broad scalpel:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw appropriately made: it should have a curved shape with sharp teeth and its handle should be firmly gripped, while the blade is carefully forged.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of the razor with its concave edge:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The shape of another razor, more subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with an extremely curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of the teeth used to cut through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller cutting tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another cutting tool; this one resembling a ray, with a serrated end, and used in various places to cut through bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray which is suitable for the treatment of one who is pierced by bone:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and in a way that all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws are covered.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremity and of the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you have administered for that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption worsens to the point where it threatens the life or causes severe damage to the member, then you should incise that member within the area where the corruption is located, so as to expel the evil and prevent death or further harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it has been wounded by fire, or you may find the darkness extending to the point where the ulcer has reached into that member which it affects and severs all the body; so make an incision there accordingly.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and percussion of certain poisonous sources such as from a scorpion's sting or a viper's bite or a similar one.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, you make an incision into the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it has taken hold in the fist of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you change your mind, you will incise the arm into the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption or change in the environment affects the elbow, it will be the patient's death; and to treat another cause of this with medicine is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, you will incise it into one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then you will incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter within the toe, then you will incise the leg into the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then in it there is only dismissal, and you leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the area; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament on top of it; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without causing a wide gap until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it should be covered with clean linen from all sides to prevent any contact with the wound, and so that the injury is aligned and dressed carefully.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powders to restrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member to a support at the appropriate level, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to pay attention to a man on his foot, this illness that you and I have recommended, which is caused by the dark color appearing on his foot due to an adjustment that resembles the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption is first caused in the deep tissues of the foot, which tend to affect the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for this illness by seeking treatment with poultices that the patient applies to the affected member, due to the severity of pain and the inflammation caused by it, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that illness caused corruption in the deep tissues of the foot indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it struck me, and I realized that I should perforate and draw off that excess fluid with something that would serve as a medicine, then apply purification to the body of the patient; and the excess does not recur, and we begin to move on to another deep tissue that we started with the foot.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the physician applies the scalpel to the patient's hand, and you do not want to perform this operation hoping for the resolution of that superfluity, rather you must persist in the incision of the patient's dead hand, because the virtue of the illness was on the verge of resolving.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and convinced me that that man had prepared and incised his hand completely, and he is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this story merely to provide aid regarding this illness, but also to explain its meaning and the way in which it should be understood.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the cure of wounds and the quality of enema therapy with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as it collects pus, and it subsequently ruptures and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, and the place left is hollowed out as if by a pipe, and the skin above it remains intact, and is not subject to further corruption, and does not press upon the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption completely engulfs a member, it is then called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is that you cut that cord entirely as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption does not succeed due to its last effect, and if the cord has passed through the skin, then treat it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil and wine mixed equally, and placed in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the desired temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then, take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash out the affected sinus with it, tighten the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then, remove that foul matter; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the wound healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, enema with ash water can be used when this medicine is not available; take the ash of bones, put it in water, and then collect that and use it for enema within a period until you feel that the sinus has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema with honey and water mixed with one-third of a finely ground herb (possibly a reference to a specific herbal mixture), for the honey has purifying and washing properties, and the water helps adhere to the sinus, especially when the water contains no excess of astringency or dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, clean the area with warm water to remove the matter that causes the flesh to form there.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you should take a solution of dyes and dissolve that oily matter and apply it as a sting; or clean the area with certain medicines in enemas, which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the swelling are narrow, through which the catheter for the enema cannot pass, then gradually enlarge it with a small knife, and apply hot compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifice appears wide, then you should close it with stitches and leave it in such a position that the amount of liquid in the enema is increased.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of the patient from which the arm exits is elevated above its parts, dry it in the lowest place on them so that the arm runs within them, because when the arm is compressed in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated inside.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of the bone in the lowest place as you wish, then pierce that prepares the member so that the arm can run from it lightly according to what you have prepared and no cause for the compression of the arm remains.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied over the sinus according to what you want to extend, also applying them on a cloth from above.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers the entire sinus; then, with scissors, cut along the right side of the opening of the sinus slightly wider than the opening itself; and extend over another cloth of linen the amount of lint according to the width of the opening, and place it over it at a distance from the opening of the sinus so that the discharge of the arm is prevented from it and the cloth does not remain large but should be changed every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is above the opening of the sinus, which purges at all times so as to draw out what is collected in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has collected over the opening of the sinus has become adhered, or a strong adhesion has formed, on certain days you loosen it, and on the third day, after loosening the infection, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If it is a sinus that has created a narrow space with a subtle virus, do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it, for healing in it is its own, for it is from some men that flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and from others, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a blood clot in the vein is suddenly dislodged, you will know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein persists and becomes prolonged, then adjust the treatment with drying medicines, since these medicines are moist in their nature and virtue, they become dry when added with oil.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last part of the treatment is to take drying oil mixed with rosin and apply it over the affected area, then wrap it with a cloth and continue the treatment until it is completely healed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in the same way when there is no pain: apply drying oil mixed with myrrh and aloes, add frankincense, burn them all and reduce them to a powder over fire; then wrap this mixture on cloth and press it onto the affected vein; use the same method with honey that you have noticed to be thickened.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And at times, certain herbs such as long and sliced lilies of the valley (lilies of the valley), chamomile, and centaury are administered, and these simples are mixed or adjusted, crushed and filtered and powdered over honey which has been collected; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the inflammation persists and is not healed by this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the flesh of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with fistular treatment, as it is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of pannarics (skin rashes), oozing wounds, and added incisions of the finger, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarics are an apostema (skin condition) that begins with the nail of the finger or toe, and it strongly affects other digits, and as it progresses and its treatment is delayed, it becomes either a cauterized apostema or corrupted, and pus oozes within that corrodes the root of the nail, and it severely corrupts the entire nail, and its corruption reaches the bones within, causing a foul odor. The end of the affected finger takes on an extreme appearance, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have dealt with it as we have said in the previous section and do not confirm your treatment, then you should cut away all the excess that is pressing on the joint and apply a cautery to the wound close to it, for cauterization provides relief in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is strong and the joint healthy, and the extra fluid in the joint already compresses the flesh inside, and it begins to hurt and inflame, then you should make a slight cut at the angle of the joint that is pressing on the flesh, and push it apart, cutting the flesh easily, and place something hot over it containing medicinal, non-corrosive substances until all the inflammation has subsided; then treat it with an ointment.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	However, if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you should cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is there health where the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe corrosion and decay in the said part, then incise it with one of the knives according to the memory of its pain, and then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If it is necessary to perform percussion or incision on the nail due to severe pain, at the beginning of the procedure, cut off the nail with a sharp, sec-cutionary knife across its top, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh remaining under the nail, as this could cause intense pain and lead to the growth of excess, adherent tissue in the area; then treat that spot with something to alleviate the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of most people, is entirely flesh in some, primarily bones in others, or entirely in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is their nature in certain parts of the body.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born into this world without knowledge of it will not suffer, but he who is born into strong joints is prone to pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshly, the cut is shallow, for you must insert your instrument into their skin at a slight angle.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with the problem at the joint's root finds cure difficult; therefore, be careful to avoid its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born with such knowledge at their root, be careful to make an initial cut into their flesh in a circular motion around the bone, and then use a suitable saw to close it, ensuring it heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that occurs between the joints due to repeated use or by nature in those who are born without it, or as a result of hernias or fire burns or similar conditions, should therefore be carefully removed so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets some linen soaked in warm oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate between them or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation seems to occur in certain parts of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding the incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins become varicose, which are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid, which occur in most parts of the body, especially in the legs, more so in those who walk, work, or bear heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary that you administer a purge to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and also draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their fever is according to two manners: one is to make an incision and drain the black pus, and the other manner is that the vein is raised and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made in this manner: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick pus is resolved, which is foul from the thigh, then tightly hold the patient's thigh to the upper part of the infected area with a bandage, and make an incision in one, two, or three places along the vein, widening it, and raise the black pus with the upper part of the leg, towards the area above, and below, until all the pus is drained, as much as you wish and as often as necessary, and this tolerates the strength of the illness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then close that one, and order the patient to avoid foods that cause black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Maybe: "And their elevation is according to this manner: You who lift the patient's leg, if it is stiff and covered in hair, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with warm water until it becomes flexible and the veins are dilated; or if it is exercised through a strong workout, then do so without a bath until the member is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord at the right of the vein, either in its length or at the end, and if it is very low, you should tie it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then, cut the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you must assess its condition as you observe that disease declines to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, after you have extracted and removed the cord, you will observe that white is the vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert your fingers into the space between that is elevated and free from the cord, and suspend it with a light touch of a sharp instrument.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut at an angle to the first one, and carefully separate the cord from the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section, after the talon, and extract it, lifting it up until it is removed from the second cut, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you have extracted the one from the highest or most superior section among all the cuts, ensuring that all are removed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not adhere to extracting and elevating it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle into the space and extract it, or insert the fingers into the gap and turn your hand over all parts where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and it will come back to harm the patient through that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is removed, you will place over the affected area, dipped in wine and rubbed with both white and unwhite oil, and treat that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting in which it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should make an opening over all the part of its twisting and at the places where it wraps itself, and raise that whole part until it is lifted.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to pierce the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult to raise that; and use your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of an ulcer:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not cut sharply like ulcers, nor of extreme acuteness so as to affect the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein because of its subtlety; as we have said, there is sufficient thickness in it.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the fields of Arabia and in the rear lands of India, which are dry and have little vegetation, where there is neither grass nor open spaces.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very little of it is generated in other parts of the body, apart from the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of decay is such that it comes from within the body, bringing snakes, worms, and maggots, which are born between the feces and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending arrival of gout is this: a sudden inflammation occurs in the leg, the affected area becomes swollen, and then the vein begins to protrude from that swollen spot, resembling a plant being torn out root and all.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extreme of gout appears, you will notice that you must wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Within this lead, a small dragon resides, and you should remove the lead from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever gout arises from any external cause, wrap it in lead and note its progress.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the pain persists, you should incise a part of the gout and wrap it; do not cut too deeply until it is completely drained, for if you do, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, and bad ulcers in that spot.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated further and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the patient's body and no cause remains in their body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some people have noted its length reaching up to the hand and fingers, and I myself have seen it extend to a length of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut open during treatment, then insert the ray into its tract and pierce that long tract through the body, so that everything inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein is sometimes very winding, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes great pain, and it is known to branch from any painful area.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat it as we have said in the previous division and pay attention to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine inflammation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is called bovine inflammation in some countries, as it causes visible swelling in the animals and is characterized by the presence of a small worm that originates between the intestines and meat. It spreads throughout the body, causing pain and eventually breaking the intestines and expelling the worm.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause the appearance of worms, serpents, roundworms, and ascarians in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared by its malignity, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it attacks the brain, severely damaging it and even destroying it, as one can observe.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure and extract it, it is not done unless you understand its movement and appearance, and then you grasp what is above it and what remains below it with a strong grip, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause severe pain, then apply a hot cautery at the place where it resides, and the main reason to fear is the corruption of it which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you try to cure that which has been affected at the root of the wound, then tighten over the brow with a strong restriction, and dry it, and extract that; and take care that the patient uses purifying medicines for their body to evacuate corrupt, bad humors, and be wary of foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the subject of pain relief.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called naphria in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You have been called to tend to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which had been broken an hour earlier. As it swelled, you noticed that it changed color, appearing almost like living silver as it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then, after removing the pain from that area, he placed pressure on the muscle, and did so for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then he repeated the same process on the other side, until he had achieved success with the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I then reassembled myself, turning over the entire body as I had seen it, and was too amazed by the permutation of the disease and the speed with which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many which cause great pain to be exchanged from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen this in the feet as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think this is in the feet but rather because the woman was old, with a dry body and visible veins, and in this state, the sensation of that changed wind is apparent.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this regressive treatment does not appear in those who are healthy and have moist bodies with veins barely visible.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to cure them, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, tighten over that part and let it rest slightly and dry over that area until that airiness is eliminated and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not know how to use these shoes, then cure it by removing the cause of airiness from the body and by applying things that expel wind, and bind those foul-smelling pills and serpentine pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they strike, for their diversity lies in some having sharp points, others small, concave, or dull, all being solid; and some have three edges, while others have wings, and some are fletched.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it is divided into two manners: for the principal members, such as the head, heart, lungs, bowels, bladder, and their like, when it attacks any of these members and appears as signs of death, which I will relate below, then you must avoid extraction of that arrow from those parts where death is that in which the greatest dispositions are found, and when these malady-signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the patient is when an arrow strikes in it and passes through the bone, especially in the skull above which it occurs due to violent effusion of blood, scotomata, vertigo, pain in the feet, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion of speech, vomiting of bile, and severe loss of words, and is destroyed voice; from the site of the plague there appears white humid discharge resembling powder, and blisters similar to the consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these symptoms appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the arrow enters the heart, so that it is close to the left breast, and you feel a sharp pain in the area where it is lodged, not a weak pain; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and the flow of black blood, and chilling from the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; then know that death approaches with all its might.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung, are a sputum of blood from the wound, and the vessels near the collarbone are enlarged, and the patient's condition changes, and they exhale with great difficulty, demanding forceful breathing.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the skin in the area of the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, then it causes great pain with violent sighs, and all the muscles of the body are weakened.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, it will cause intense pain from the intestinal distress caused by an undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the organs or intestines, or a hernia, which is irreparable, and there is no hope of healing from removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes it to leak urine outside, and results in some discharge from the body, and causes intense pain to the patient, then know that this is a mortal wound.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts, such as the face, neck, head, shoulders, elbow, back bones, hip joint, and leg, can also be saved with careful handling when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about what I have observed regarding these arrows, so that you may understand this concerning the treatment of wounds.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal nerve of a man in the side of his nose, and it is extracted from him in another way, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, he recovers, and there is no further damage to his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the grays of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without leaving an auricle.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and there was no further damage to his eye from this unfortunate event.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the gullet, which was an Arab arrow, and it is that one to which only ears are attached; and then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the gullet of the man; and then I gently removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his stomach, and I thought he would die from it; so, after we had passed XXX days without any change regarding the state of his bowels, I incised into the arrow and put pressure on it, and thus he was healed, and no further harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been embedded in his back, and the wound was deeply seated, and after setting fire to it near the surface of the skin, I extracted the arrow from the root of the injury.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had been embedded in her stomach, and the wound was deeply seated within her bowels, and it did not change regarding its position, and the woman suffered no great discomfort from any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man whom an arrow has struck in the face, and the wound is severe; when the arrow is removed, little pain is felt, but many similar marks remain.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who had been struck in the middle part of his nose; it had already inclined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called upon for the cure, so close the wound of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; and then he inquired about that attempt subtly, and felt nothing; but he did feel a slight prickling behind his right ear, and then he hoped that that prickling was from the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied a plaster to the place with an absorbent and digestive effect, confident that the location would reveal itself to him so that he could locate the place of the arrow, for it would dry up over that spot.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be concerned about the location of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply the plaster over it for several days without any adverse effects; and as the wound heals, break up the swelling from the removal of the arrow over several days until you feel the arrow within its sheath again and I attend to this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should focus on treating the acute corrosive wound for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently pull, and with a gentle touch, remove the tip of the arrow, which is stuck to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the wound using that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I spend time on this for periods of time over four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then, as the wound becomes enlarged, I attempt to insert forceps, hold them there, and do not be concerned with their appearance, then I will no longer need to subtilize or invent in that regard until one day, through the ways of invention described at the end of this chapter, I manage to pull it out; and once I have restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, and they restored it, and the disease became solidified, and the malady was healed entirely, and there was no deformity in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows, in order to provide this rule and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood from the narration, nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans speak a little about what is present, and much about what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments necessary for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they have entered, or on the contrary side of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is thrown out from the place where it enters, or is shot through a fleshy part, and is pushed out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not pay attention to the time when eating, soon you will leave it for some days until the flesh around it decays and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not pay attention to your diet, leave it for some days, and it will eventually be pushed out due to its attraction and movement on a certain day.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your diet for some days, soon you will need to puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle point where the arrow has spread, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the brain's ventricles and appears in the patient, abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there for some days; for if the arrow reaches the skull, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the skull, and the patient recovers after some days without any complications from those injuries, then devise a means to extract the arrow and the fluid.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and resists extraction, then administer substances in the area surrounding the arrow as we have recommended, and care for the site until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body and lodged in a nerve, you should investigate that attempt, and if you feel any sensation, then apply certain stimulants to attract it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the tightness of the swelling and the length of the arrow, here neither nerve nor vein is present, then make an incision over the swelling until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles that need to be removed, then you must cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the tools you can use; and devise a plan on how to remove the flesh around the broken auricles and their twists until it becomes possible to free them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location, use a twist of your hand and forceps from all sides until it becomes firm; and with the greatest care and subtlety, avoid breaking the arrow and make its removal difficult and thorough.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach that of your hour, then wait for a few days until the parts around it in the flow of blood become relaxed, and then repeat the process when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience difficulty with a flowing discharge of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or strings, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by yourself.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady aligns according to the figure by which you aim the target of the arrow, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your ability, then administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Consider arrows that are launched against the opposite party, or those that have already struck any part of the outside parties, or make the end of the arrow limp due to the pressure from above the designated cord and turn it towards [the affected area]; then apply it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and shoot it, for it is made light for easy insertion.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the direction of the arrow that penetrates into the bone, and amplify its pressure, then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if it does not leave after several days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that area, then you push it towards it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft has fallen and you want to give a pulse, then insert your finger into it, if it is soft, press firmly into the concave part of it on the side of the arrowhead, and push it towards it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then you push it strongly towards the shaft, as the arrowhead is pushed away by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, you must press all your concave flesh where it truly is, if you can, and tend to that part as seems best.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel it through the skin, and it is possible for you to remove it without causing injury to a vein or nerve, then remove it and treat the wound as necessary, and bind it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like an awl, made with a sawtooth design to grip the arrow firmly so it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, large, few, or small, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness and fragility, and the width of the wound, and the tightness of the flesh.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of applying pressure to this concave extremity in order to remove the arrowhead embedded in it, and to push out that foreign body.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of applying pressure to the concave extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that the arrowhead embedded in the concave extremity is removed and pushed out.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins suitable for phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in the head, are two pulsatile veins near the ears, called the temporal arteries; two veins on either temple; and two veins in each eye, known as the lacrimal ducts. There is also a vein in the middle part of the forehead and one at the tip of the nose; two veins in the neck; and two veins on either lip; and two veins in the tongue — these are called the alaric veins —; and there are two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, one is a cefalic vein, and it originates from the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head", it is sluggish, and it is the median vein, composed of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cefalic vein; and the people call that vein "the vein of the whole body," the basilic vein is the one that terminates in the domestic latz and is called "citular," while the common people call it "the abdominal vein"; the end of the arm, and it terminates on the axilla, is where flebotomy is performed, and it is the vein that appears on the skin through a clear manifestation; and salvatella, it is the vein located between the auricular vein and the smaller one near the pit, situated on both sides.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of these is left at the curvature of the inner side of the wild latz; the second is superficial, and its location is left at the camba of the domestic latz; the sciatic vein, and its location is left at the camba of the wild latz; and on the camba there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is for ancient cataracts, migration, and ulcers, as well as old head ailments.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the method of bleeding is as follows: it should be done at the base of the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on both sides in the area where the veins are closest to the surface, gently applying pressure; then tighten the bandage around the head, securing it between the two areas where the veins are located just above the ears; and if you want to confirm this by feel, try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the sharp scalpel and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand above the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as necessary; and make the cut deep enough as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it strongly with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this treatise about the incision and cauterization of those parts.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are located on the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute excesses of fluid in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the technique of phlebotomy on these parts should be as follows: restrict the patient's collar tightly until the two veins appear, and their pulsation is clearly felt after a little time; and then you will have succeeded.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, raise the cord above the vein as indicated, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument here, and elevate the vein; also cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, tighten the compression around the patient's hernia, place the hot compress over it for an hour, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now, having recalled them, and made the incision, and drawn them into the beginning of the opening.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein on the forehead is appropriate for ancient maladies of the face and migraine, and also to bleeding and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy should be according to what you have recommended; so, for the disease that constricts its own collar, place a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a "fossor," whose form is suitable for this.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the puncture that is at the top of the vein in the pit and press it with a lean or other tool in the manner of the vein, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the puncture from the hernia and strengthen it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases, the flesh is opened through a lateral fluotomy, but it is not understood that this fluotomy of acute extremity is like other fluotomies, as it is from a different extremity, and the fluotomy on the transversal side, because the bone is strong and would easily break during a subtile fluotomy.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The squeezing of the two veins that are the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to itching and crusting on the eyes, as well as facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the fluotomy is that it tightens the collar around its own area, then you perform fluotomies on those areas, and you stand over the top of them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the flap surgery is performed according to the transverse direction along a slightly narrow incision, for in the area there is little flesh; and if the flap surgery is delicate, then its extreme edge is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then make the patient urinate as much as necessary, rest on that side, tighten the bandages for a night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The flap surgery on the nasal vein is useful for high fever and severe vomiting, and for facial pains and migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the advantage of this flap surgery is that it tightens the patient's collar and places their nose with the left hand, taking the delicate flap long and positioning it in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and because the pain begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure you complete the procedure of phlebotomy gradually with your hand, allowing blood to flow according to your need; then close it after a night, as it is restored more lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the use of phlebotomy for both young and old should be restricted to draining excess blood and starting treatments, and healing leprosy, motas (mottling), and corrosive ulcers, as well as with potent remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for those is that the illness withdraws from each part near its root; and the practitioner is over the patient's head, and the patient lies on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make small incisions in the vein of the leg with phlebotomy, allowing blood to flow gradually; and remove it from the wound according to its volume or as needed; then close it as you do for the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then carefully loosen the ligament and tighten both veins with a gentle pressure to prevent further inflammation, and place a bandage within the sheet where the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the jugular vein phlebotomy, it is useful for small aphthas and pustules in the mouth, gingival decay, bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers found on the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of this phlebotomy is that it stops the disease in its track, tightens the neck with a bandage, then turns the patient's lips inside out and examines two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each vein is identified by their darker color due to the smallness of the vessels in that area, and they are incised with a sharp knife.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt remaining in your mind, and you are unsure which vein to choose, then you should proceed with the incision on the larger one of them, and extract the pus that is present in those veins.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And it appears as if there are two veins on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Often, the custom is to cut both veins that are on the left lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	When both veins that are on the tongue are cut, it is then appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its origins, which are in the throat, as well as for conditions affecting the uvula and oral cavity.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomy involves following the disease between the patient's teeth before the sun, lifting the tongue, placing it to one side, and observing both the left and right veins, as well as noting their color, which tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And so perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to finish with your hand in phlebotomy of those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the groin, through which the blood usually flows in all men, the flebotomy of them is done according to two manners; either by applying a flebotomy mitt or olive oil with subtlety declining; or cutting with a flebotomy knife, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for section, and they are made in special, narrow, and subtle ways according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle flebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both the width of it also with times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full proceeding apparently thick, and to those that contain great rough clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of smaller size and has more delicate ends, and it is appropriate for flebotomy of delicate veins that contain subtle blood from citrus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the youthfulness of the flebotomy of the basil vein, which is one of three veins: here we extract the blood from the diseases that are left in the gullet and the collarbone, and from this, the foot and the belly are dried.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be very careful and cautious in that area, because if he leaves the artery there or makes a mistake in the flebotomy puncture, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding of blood, so it is important not to flebotomize that area with a sharp flebotomy, but rather to cut it carefully with a less sharp instrument.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basil vein does not appear by clear appearance, then you must know that you leave that one and change to another, or find some branch of it; or flebotomize in the place where it ends in the arm, because that is manifest; and cut it with a less sharp instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, first cover in front of the stricture of the arm you are working on until you locate the site within the elbow, and then apply pressure over it; then bring the arm close and cut the vein with a concave section for the flebotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid striking the artery with the percussion.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you observe, with tension of the ligament, an inflation in the place you have marked with your hand, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you observe the blood flow in the flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the bleeding is slight, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and tie off the vessel over a long space; and if the bleeding stops on its own, since it has been severed, tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And observe the patient from the moisture of their body, be very careful with them and do not harm them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the gangrenes do not separate, and it is not appropriate to apply medicine to it, then you incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of it is contracted and the gangrene is separated; or you take a piece of rust from iron, and make that, and take one third of it and tighten it over the place of the vein with a ligature and poultice within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the gangrene is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned to the recollection of the place of the powdered gangrene's flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of gangrene from them is difficult due to the location of the plague and the possibility of vein ligature in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Regarding the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for draining blood from the upper part of the head and leaving it from the lower parts of the body; therefore, as we have said, it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of cephalica.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be mindful of the phlebotomist who has excessive fear of phlebotomy, because when they withdraw blood, it can affect a nerve; then, in the puncturing of phlebotomy, they find the nerves, which causes numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and often the patient does not recover completely. This nerve excites feelings; if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not evident, you must know that when you perform phlebotomy with your hand, cut the vein without affecting the nerve, and avoid damaging it with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves pain in the legs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you wish to perform a phlebotomy with a olive or myrtle needle, it is the safest for all veins, as it does not harm any arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to know that in performing the phlebotomy, you should not puncture the tip of the lizard (presumably referring to a vein) too deeply, seek the most lenient location, and do not press on it, unless it is troubled by the initial percussion that precedes the phlebotomy on some occasions.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, a strong inflammation occurs in certain individuals when not performing phlebotomy in the first percussion, so do not pay attention to that particular inflammation.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy and its complications are also factors to consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translates to: "The first of which you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of recovery, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the arm: cephalic, median cubital, and basilic; it is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if it is the first day, three hours after sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be administered at any time of day or night, whenever it is convenient and necessary, whether in the morning or evening.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is important to note that phlebotomy should not be performed on children under 13 years of age, women who are pregnant, and the elderly who have already passed 60 years old.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be freed from some condition in any way, it is necessary that he purify his bowels before performing the bloodletting with a lion's claw, if there is a significant fissure within them, so that the veins do not throw off the excess fluid during the bloodletting of the bowels, which are clean, and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let the patient not be subjected to bloodletting without sacred knowledge and fasting, nor should they escape from illness or madness until this is thoroughly examined, nor from hydroptic ailments, and it is better that bloodletting be performed with caution in the case of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplied urination, defecation, work, exercise, or any cause that weakens vitality, either in the body or in animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is necessary to consider the subtle aspects of humors in relation to this, if the pain is severe, from food and drink, and from medications, if it is possible for him to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse yourself in a bath, unless some cause or exercise prevents it, so that the inflammation is reduced.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce the foot of the patient so that it is guarded from all evil animal accidents on that day, if there is distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, if there is excessive work and strain, heat and similar conditions.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bedside, ensure the presence of causes for the cure of which people usually suffer, aromatizing and scenting them with balms and similar things according to the possibility of each.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is clean, other than the one from which the patient was phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with your hand, the flebotomator, make two or three strokes; and tighten the ligament with a strap and envelop it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the tightness should be tempered, for the tightness when it is unequal, or the tightness is excessive, then forbid the flow of the blood; or if it is towards softening, then forbid the complete cessation of the blood flow.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then apply the tightness, and ensure that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are swollen and visible to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the flebotomist should apply a small amount of anti-inflammatory oil to their flebotomy, and then place their left hand indicator over the vein, allowing the location for the flebotomy to be revealed, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is relieved. Since veins are what carry blood, when the flebotomist pauses the flebotomy on a vein, it contracts due to the flebotomy, and the flebotomist removes their instrument; and if the flebotomy cuts the vein, it becomes narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the fleubotomator (bloodletter) be ready and skilled in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after performing the fleubotomi (bloodletting), if the vein is swollen at once, it is successful; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place slightly or applying pressure with a compress, if the location is not apopthetic.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is apopthetic or the illness subsides, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as it will quickly re-develop the apoplexy, nor immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the fleubotomi if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening (wound) is small and the flow of blood is subtle, and you fear that it will not reach the desired amount, then repeat the fleubotomi in that place according to its rectitude and adjust the opening a bit, and apply pressure before the location becomes apopthetic, because in most cases, a slight opening (wound) is sufficient.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may sometimes happen that the abscess has already formed, then do not hesitate over it, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply some oil to any part of the wound, because it soothes the body from pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil in any form of phlebotomy, where phlebotomists drain veins, is a well-known practice to prevent body inflammation and pain, and it is considered a wise and skilled procedure when one of those operations is performed at this place, because the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated when it is severe.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy, as it often happens due to various accidents, especially when there is no significant bloodletting but only bleeding from the vein, and you wish to drain it, then apply a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly heated, and press on it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then make sure that you do this immediately after the blood flow from that vein has stopped or by using another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or green color appears, do not pay it any mind; and if you wish, apply some external cause of alum and myrrh mixed, or some other similar substance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often, after some time, abscesses and swellings appear, requiring flebotomy of the affected area.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over that area; and if you feel softness there, you must apply compression to it; for that swelling is a sign of ill health and evil. And thereafter be careful to avoid any cause mentioned earlier, as strong blood flow will come from the affected artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area of tightness so that it becomes hardened, and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And be careful to extract the pus from everyone according to the amount of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the pus as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the pus is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if you break it up and it is thick, leave it to drain until it becomes subtle; and if it is hard, then wait for its acuity to subside.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of him who is full and strong and requires extraction of pus all at once; in such a case, enlarge the venipuncture of the vein and make the venipunctures wider.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for him who is weak, do the opposite; extract it in multiple stages and make the incision narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best approach for venipuncture is the transverse section, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of flibotomy avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and is more laudable and safer than flibotomy according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed for syncope to occur after flibotomy, and know that you must cure him before the flibotomy with a small amount of wine infused in milky or simple oxymel, and draw out the blood from him in three or four draws.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold and congested condition, then take before the flibotomy wine infused in myrrh or in honey-based syrup aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or in aromatized and highly scented syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after flibotomy and it is due to the sudden release of a great deal of blood, then know that you must take in small amounts of beef broth and fragrant syrup; and use aromatic substances such as alkanet, and apply a cold compress to their foot at the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And employ other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the swelling a second time, addressing the part from which the flebotomy is done for maximum evacuation, and its virtue being cold, it evacuates the small swelling little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	He who wishes to extend his arm and dissolve his swelling a second time, and whose body is strong, should do so approximately seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	He who wishes to move the swelling from his body in the opposite direction of the initial declination, should have it extended on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	As for the body in which there is much swelling that has already been scraped and is acute and causes fever, it should be evacuated of the swelling at once and a great amount of it should be drained, and the perception of the pain should be intensified until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you should place your hand on the pulse of the body to prevent death from syncope, as these attempts should be made only when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And be careful when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to extract the blood, press upon it with great force and gently extend it slightly, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the lay (or bandage) is stuck within the flebotomium, secondarily due to the cohesion of blood in the orifice of the vein; or if it stops because of the heat of a typhic or saggy compress, continue to make gentle compression until the blood has completely drained out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is infected, do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no other choice, you may bleed them at that place or on the other arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the fistula or basilica when they are not found or are concealed, as it is composed of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the fistula is that the patient inserts their hand into the affected area until the wound becomes inflamed and the vein appears prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that stricture with a narrow strip; and perform the fistula according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or according to width.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be a wide opening, and your fistula cut should be such that you perform the fistula on the joint of the hand with a small incision.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the affected area and stop the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in the cold water, and in winter, the body of the sick person is most rested in cold water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the surgery on this vein is more safe than on all other veins, because it has neither pulse nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand strongly on it, since you have placed it in cold water, while the vein is swollen and well visible to the eye; then cut transversely; and if you puncture it from top to bottom, it will not bleed again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to sever the hand completely during phlebotomy, because then the nerves of the digit will be exposed without any flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the cold water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat the hand in the cold water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein and is prevented from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood has been extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand over the vein with oil and salt, so it is not solidified haphazardly; and in a similar manner, attend to every thread meticulously.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of the fistula made by that hand on the left side, is appropriate for the ailments of the right side.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the fistula of him/her as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the healing of the saphenous vein in the fistula is for ailments that are on the outskirts of the body, as well as for ailments of the uterus, and to retain menstruation, and for ailments of old ulcers on things and clothes, and similar to the ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the procedure of the flebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in water, and friction is applied until the veins appear; then a bandage is placed over the joint of the foot, and the location of the vein must be identified precisely from this point, and from there it branches out on the surface of the foot in many directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore the vein is cut open widely or the leg is elevated after the hernia has been reduced, as this is better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a flebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your hand over it while performing the flebotomy, taking care not to cut through them.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And both the flebotomies are successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to urinate, then you should massage the patient's foot in warm water and let the urine flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist fails on the first attempt, then they should try again in another place, since the spot is clean; and do not fear any harm from it, as long as you take care of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the same place we have mentioned is where you should insert below the knee at the point of attachment of the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the incision of the flebotomy is at the hip joint when it's for drawing blood cautiously.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flébotomy is that it allows the disease to enter a bath, quickly and firmly seizing the patient's leg from the thigh, across their ankle, in one long thin bandage, so that only this appears.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you perform a flebotomy on that part according to each available method and according to the cross, which is best; either incise it with an incision or cut it off with a secition, as the location of the disease is dry.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in many people very painful; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the touch of all, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and let the serum flow from the wound as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then carefully release the constriction and place your hand over the site of the phlebotomy, squeezing gently as it is healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilators can be of metal, or of horn, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is performed in two ways: the first involves lancing and draining pus, and the second involves only ventilating through lancing.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation, which involves lancing, is also performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilators that are applied through lancing and draining pus are in twelve places on the body, of which one place is for ventilators, and it is the last opening at the top of the head; and another opening at both sides of the nape; and ventilators under the mandible below the mouth; and two venturi openings; and two-brass vents; and two pin openings; and two cloth openings.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of blood should not be from large veins but from small ones scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not cause weakness due to phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be done with fire or hot coals in any illness caused by accumulation within the body until it is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If bloodletting is necessary due to illness or continuously, we should begin it at the onset of the month and its end, as well as in the middle of the day and at any time that seems appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men, the blood increases in severity and hardness, leading to congestion and heat on their face and head, and causing puffiness and darkness around their eyes; it causes pressure on their face and forehead, and blackness and weakness in their legs; it multiplies their breath, and some experience a pleasant taste of blood in their mouths, or their tongues become inflamed and spit out blood. It also increases their sleep, and during sleep, they may sweat blood, experience severe pains, rashes, and other similar issues.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when pain occurs for any reason among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then they command ventilation to be performed rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate relief from ventilation of the neck is that when it gives weight to the head and what sinks into the shoulders, it becomes clear that this is an appropriate evacuation of all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use any that has a foul odor or catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, one should not use those on the feet, and on the tops of which are deep injuries.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is continuously pressing down on it be relieved; and for that reason, see to it that you command the bellows handler to place his hand lightly over the parts where the pressure has been applied, lest relief not come about.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The use of bellows (ventozacio) instead of lancing (fleubotomia) the dark vein (vena fusca) and basilic: and thereby you treat asthma, and the constriction of the airways, and the rupture of the muscular wall of the airways, and cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And see to it that the bellows is not pressed down too hard, for if it remains in place for too long, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the bellows application to the forehead (alhagdahan) treats accidental pains in the head and eye, and migraine, and pressure, and pains in the roots of teeth; and it is instead of lancing (fleubotomia) the basilic.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be sure to order the fanbearer not to press his hand during the scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause a flow of bad blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	After scarification, apply alcohol to the mouth and to the corruption of the gums, resembling the conditions found in the mouth during phlebotomy from other parts of the body, specifically from both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	However, the fanbearer who performs the scarification on both plates should apply a headband, which is made by drawing warmth from the body.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the scarification within both incisions near the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, popliteal, and cephalic, draws blood from all the more easily accessible veins in the flesh, as well as the smaller veins from the other, larger veins, so that it attracts to them.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the bellows to not blow too strongly during the incision, for the place is already devoid of flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows which is blown over openings and applies air to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should instruct the bellows to be a powerful one, and of iron, for the place requires strong cutting; and its intense, forceful, thin blasts should be used for incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the bellows of the legs should be reduced in size for delicate operations, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and cause pain to old wounds on the bones and joints, and the bladder; they provoke menstruation and breathing difficulties, and serve in place of phlebotomy for two veins, and on the gallbladder and two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Nevertheless, these weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (or 'ventozas') of the chest, the healing is also directed to the openings of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning by a visible view and sucks by a temperate suction, and does not prolong the position of the openings, but rather releases them slightly, and retains those tightly, and allows the humors to come to the place by their own occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place turn red and swell, and the pain of the wound appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you make incisions and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender skin, take care to scarify him once, but not too deeply, so the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bellows to increase the scarification depth slightly, and apply suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein is significant, you must scarify twice, for the first scarification opens the way for subtilization of the vein and its liquidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very infected, then its third scarification will achieve the final result.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we want to extract small or thin veins, one scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract a hard stone, make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deeper.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is large, hard, dense, and its pores are very narrow, then the places where the suction cups should be placed must be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed oil from chamomile or st John's wort or any similar ones; and if it is in winter, then use birch oil or linden oil or camomile or sage, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and stubborn, use oil of amber, or balsamic oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions or with water infused with salt, or with water from a couch (a type of herbal infusion), or similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose leech has a lot of humidity, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are thick, wash their leeches in old wine or in water with fennel, which is greater galangal, or from anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before a bath; and it should be administered shortly after the bath for one or two hours, and the leech should rest close to the area being treated.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before letting the patient breathe?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has had blood drawn is irritable and has acute pain and inflammation, then you must take actions that cause coldness, such as milky vinegar, endive in wine, laytuguas (a type of herb), secanabin (possibly a reference to a cool compress), julep (a medicinal drink), and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should abstain from food such as chicken, young meats, spiced foods, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking warm almond milk, or milk made from the seeds of cannabis (hemp), and sumac, and use a mild-smelling wine between meals. And it is recommended that they consume little wine and food, abstain from chicken, lamb, pork, and duck, and eat smaller portions of fish and fowl.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is important that during the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the beverage be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is important to provide beverages to certain individuals with typhilaria, or early arthritis, with alcohol, musk, or nutmeg, especially before ventilation or phlebotomy, or immediately after, so that the main parts are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not allow them to take that scorching heat.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	All the openings that are a form of lancing should be openings that are stopped in the liver, and on the stomach, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, as these members do not suffer lancing upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those with joint pain, but rather the attraction of the body's pus, thus stopping a ventosa over the breast in flux of pus from the pus of the nose; and they use that to dissolve the stuck ventilation within the member, just as they stop it over the stomach and navel; for that rarifies the member and opens it up and removes pain as it resolves the ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And now rests upon the wounds when accidents occur in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the compression and eradicates the pain from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	It seems to work when it rests upon the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only, and occasionally with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes, they are administered full of heated water in the liver ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the ventilation should be filled and produce much pus, it is only water or water in which suitable herbs are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the ventilation administered with fire: its opening should be about two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the suction should be half a palm; and in the width of it, at the place where it is in the circle, half of it, the point should be small according to the quantity that fits inside it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Prepare an aromatic roast of rosemary, citrus, sage, lemon, onions, and garlic so that it does not harm the member from its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place across it a hot iron or a piece of wood where the candle is held over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This is the greatest cure for that which we have discussed; its effectiveness varies according to the ailments and the condition of the patient who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and the exhausted should be different from those for young people and those with robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of placing this cup over the member is to extend the heat from the fire with a decent amount of firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and then place it over the center of the transverse bar at the exact spot of the suction cup, so that the flame surrounds the area without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place your hand over the affected member, and apply it to the area we mentioned, as soon as you have the wind and do not suffer from indigestion that affects this area, and the heat causes vapor to rise on that path, then the pain will be quickly relieved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then reinforce the bandage according to their method, and repeat this if they experience any pain from it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Use a suction cup that is applied to the pleurisy without any cross-hairs or path, and do not administer anything but fill it with water, and place it over the affected member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the way to do it: And this suction cup, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii. (Note: 'xcvii' likely represents the roman numeral for 74)
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting instruments are not applied to most parts of the body but only to those parts where it is impossible to place cupping glasses, due to their small size, as well as to the nose and similar areas; or to a part devoid of flesh, such as the nose and others like it.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found as bloodletting instruments in the moist wounds of a patient.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is appropriate to lie the patient down both day and night in moist water until they become lethargic, without causing any pain in their belly; and then empty the body at the beginning with flebotomy and cupping glasses; and rub the patient's limbs until they turn red; and let them rest.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and the case is resolved.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the area with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if that does not help, wash the area with wine mixed with hot water, and then press and massage it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the fever persists and there is a risk of blood loss, you should immerse a cloth in hot water and place it over the affected area to stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the fever has spread, you can apply powdered vitriol or substances similar to those used for sty-causing infections, as long as it aids in the removal of the fever; or place compresses with cooked fava beans over the affected area, leaving them until the beans adhere to the skin and the fever subsides.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And, if necessary, repeat bloodletting, when it is possible to change the bands.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is contraindicated, you can rub the area with fresh fever or insert a needle into the spots where fever arises; then place compresses, as those who feel any fever soon afterwards will benefit from it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish them to close, sprinkle a little aloe, or salt, or ash on them and press at once.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of recovery: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, my child, know that those who boast of this chapter are the ignorant doctors and the common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this way of understanding in our land is hidden; and you should not forget it at any time; I have not set forth what follows unless after a long study of the books of the Ancients and an examination of their understanding, I extracted science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have dedicated this work to the study and experience of my entire life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge encompasses and upon which my experience is based; so that you may condense it and free it from the encumbrance of elaboration; and I have concluded it with a summary at the end of explanation; and I have illustrated it with examples at the conclusion of declaration; and I have structured in it various forms of the instruments that are administered for treatment, as has been added to the declarations made earlier, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of various fractures of bones, of those which must be considered before we begin the remembrance of limbs lost and their diverse conditions, if any.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters to those who understand them, at the beginning, the artisan is forced and stands in truth over these; so it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you should act at once with fleubotomy or remove the affected part, or in some cases, if no other cause is evident, with the debility of strength, or it is the one to which the accident happens, or weak from decrepitude, or there is a time of intense heat, or intense friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then it is advisable to be content with your own food of dried herbs and flesh of fowl and crabs; and avoid thick meats and filling yourself with foods that clog the veins of the leg, as long as you are careful to prevent apostema and if you do not fear the effusion of material into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original state, to which they usually return after being corrected.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be healed, you should ensure that the patient is nourished with nourishing foods of moderate and not too heavy or dense nutriment, such as foods prepared from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and beans, and meat, and veal, and fresh fish, and similar foods, and according to this regulation, there is a formation of coagulation in the fracture more lightly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones crack when they are in the first stages of decay and in old people, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature due to the withering of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they continue to be consolidated and continuous according to their nature as long as those members wither, and they are only continued and consolidated at the end of winter, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature nevertheless adapts and amends the broken bone from any similar cause of gout in which a thick substance adheres and strengthens that part, so that it becomes glued and tightly connected, until the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, and no cause should prohibit that from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, food that has weight and stickiness and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The great diversity of fractures depends on the diversity of limbs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is diverse from a fracture of the bone in the arm; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And remember all species of fracture, explained in their respective distinct chapters.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The great diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture, another when it occurs in them like stars; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: thus are the stag-like and star-like fractures, and others that proceed and do not proceed, as is done in writing, and there is the fracture with pain and dislocation in the head, and the small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for all species, there is a specific pain or torment inherent in their restoration according to the distinct memory of it in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is known as a bone fracture: it is a deformity of the bone, and that protrusion and appreciation of it in the sensation, and only of it when you compress that area with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no deformity in the location, nor does it cause any pain when you touch the bone due to movement or the illness does not produce much suffering, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformity or a small fracture, where you do not feel pain when compressing with your hand, and then it causes pain over time; apply remedies of which you have memory appropriate to the location; and be very careful due to a slight tightness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the location, when it is curved and not divided into two or another thing that does not happen in it naturally, when the entire part of its counterpart has been torn apart, then you must begin from your hour to correct the position of the body that has suffered an apostema caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If it has suffered an apostema caut, then you should leave it for a few days until the apostema ceases; and thereafter, use splints or any other means of support that you can devise to facilitate healing and prevent further damage.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration of the body and the healing of its bones is easier than the treatment of the joints where the damage has occurred naturally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And it is important to strengthen it according to the recollection of the body's memory.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is fractured in two parts, it is necessary to extend this member from both ends, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use a splint with your hand if the member is small; or use two ropes or one rope and a splint.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position in which you support the member should be equal to its natural form, while the parts are stretched from the twisted member, then you perforate so as to cause their return to those additional aids cleverly and according to each way that you can do in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware that according to your strength, you do not harm the patient with your operation, nor cause any damage; and perforate yourself according to your power, applying one bone to another in its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure to touch the affected area with your hand at an opportune time, and if you encounter any other cause, correct it and engulf it with the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause apoplexy with their treatments, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen through the operations of their misguided efforts.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, arrange in proper position and complete the operation and stricture of that member, and provide rest and tranquility; warn the patient regarding it and make him/her avoid any twisting that might cause pain during their wakefulness and sleep, and observe his/her revolution and agitation, and manage his/her excretion, and attend to all his/her movements at all times; and wait for a position of the member in which the pain or injury is assured to be removed, which is caused by being in a position where the member feels pain; then know that you change its position from one in which it does not feel pain; and take care that its position is straight and level so that no deformity occurs in the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the member that calms is what you should know; for you must understand that broken members vary in their fragility, size and form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And regarding those that are small like the arm and its bone structure and similar to others, know that their envelopment should be with very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Those who have a swelling as with cloth or leg, must ensure that it is wrapped tightly and firmly, for the tightness of each wrap connects the large member and strengthens it from every side, so that nothing enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then, as you begin, start the patient's evacuation of feces, apply suitable lubrication to it, over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps according to the member's size; and tighten your hand slightly on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then, approach the part that is most painful at the site of the fracture, and tighten gently, avoiding the strong pressure that you applied to secure the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then, gradually extend the wrap at the site of the fracture, and gently loosen the tightness little by little, until you take from the site a significant portion.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the affected area, ensuring it is properly wrapped; and observe the bindings at the point of fracture; and your operation should be on the tightness of the bandage and softening it according to what we have said about the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then place between the bandages a piece of leather or cloth to hold the curvature of the fracture if there is any; otherwise, do not place anything in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then place another bandage over these star-shaped bindings properly arranged, if the area is not inflamed or infected, and bind over the swelling and inflammation; and leave it for a few days; and then tighten the star-shaped bindings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The bindings should be of different types, skillfully made; either from canvas, or from wood, or from palm fronds; and their size should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the pad placed over the fracture is thick and wide enough, slightly larger than the other pads; consider the length of the splint according to the member's size and shape; then tighten the pads with another wrap as per your initial tightness; and place it gently above them according to the stricture we've discussed, keeping in mind that the tighter the stricture should be, the further it is from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And consider that the threads should vary in thickness and fineness, and be numerous; if the threads are thick, as you've seen during some operations where thick thread pauses the string of a cord, it's a great error when the tightness is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness, and you won't know if there's less than a finger width between pads.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the disease is limited to the ends of the bones, then tighten the bandages at those sites, leaving a woolen or linen cloth between them until it does not cause any damage.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fractures are themselves a plague, causing disruption in the spine, and you should remember this according to the second chapter's particularities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that even if all members are broken, they cannot be bandaged to the bones on the first day; this is because when a member is large, it does not allow the bandages to rest on it for too long, so they should be changed every few days or weekly, depending on your caution regarding the onset of gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the plasterers to which the ancients restored, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A method of plastering as a means of restoring a fracture, suitable for complex cases and particularly for women and children, since it does not involve applying heat or friction: take flour powder from a mill, which is the essence of flour that prevents the movement of the grindstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that does not work, then scrape off the old plaster from the surface, and do not make it too thick or thin, and use this method.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, in equal parts; add frankincense and aloe in equal parts; mix thoroughly with either lichor or egg albumen if the patient's condition is severe; this plaster is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and gives strength to most people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering for fractures and twists: take mige (mistletoe) and alder bark, each in equal parts; myrrh and aloe, each one-tenth part; acacia, 60 parts; Armenian wool, 20 parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Despite all these treatments in mortar with a strong composition, they are strained, they are filtered, and they are applied with water or egg albumen and are administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and to relieve pain in these and in cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in a mixture of vinegar and oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster, however, is not effective for restoration, it prevents abscesses and expels pain precisely.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores closed bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves, dry them, mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of plastering is used to aid in the restoration of broken bones and when you desire a resolution of the inflammation of an abscess: take roots of mullein, chamomile, and violets, flour of arse, all parts equally; crush them together and mix with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that to the affected area with cool water from cilantro or plain water and use a compress.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another plastering method for stronger resolution in cases of severe abscesses, for the restoration of the member: take roots of mullein and its seeds, and also ballastice, melilot, violet flowers, chamomile, all parts equally; crush them together and mix with hyssop water or distilled water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not specify in his work that it should be placed over the affected member unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made, and no other causes are present; and it is recommended to be between coarse and fine.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	When a fracture is seen in a limb, after its restoration and the causes of its drying out due to lack of heat are sought, this is done with myrrh, ointments and similar substances as if for those causes that we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of chalk, horsehair, human hair from scalps or sparrow feathers, and salt, mix them together, make a paste, and apply it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be according to how much the bandage covers and then remove it slowly if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, you should not hurry in its removal.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or pressure or swelling at the site, you should immediately remove that part of the plaster or bandage and stop the treatment.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sponge from the sea, wet them in boiled water, and apply that to the area until the pressure and pain cease; then let the member rest for an hour; and place over it woolen cloth soaked in vinegar or rose oil, and keep it there for a night, ensuring safe from gangrene, and letting the inflammation of the member subside, and alleviating its pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that delicate restriction and apply a small plaster without straining from your initial constriction, and do so gently until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the gangrene, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms have already subsided, and you find it in need of a plaster and restriction again, then repeat the same as you initially began.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no such cause occurs to the member as we have said, then do not remove it for three or four or five or seven days; and in some cases, everything is left for twenty days, according to your judgment, due to the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust the tightness more than in your first adjustment, tighten around the hernia's food supply, according to how the recollection of it precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you find the location of the fracture already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that the nutrition must be prevented from reaching that area; so drill into it with a tepid water embrocation whenever you encounter it; and do this every three days; and slightly loosen the tightness, and by this operation, direct the nutrition to the member, and in this way, the healing will begin.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Here is the translation of the text:
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen anyone do this, so it is all the more reasonable that you should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Second Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes differ, and the causes are diverse. Some fractures occur due to the impact of a blow that completely shatters the bone within its joint, leaving the bone fragments dislodged, as if they had been broken off; this type is called compound fracture. Another type occurs when a space in the bone is cut, penetrating the flesh, but the fracture does not go all the way through to the rear of the bone; this type is known as simple fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures can vary, from minor to severe, and they may be either compressive or destructive; their cause is a blow or sudden impact on a hard surface, similar in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture, whether it is penetrating and already brings the panniculus close to the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, the pain from these two fractures can be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this fracture is damaged in the bone, at the subtlety of the hair's root, and that's why this specific type of fracture is called a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone, which makes some layers of the bone move inside, and it occurs in the concave area, just as it happens with the ribs when they are struck, and it's the movement of their entry into the cavities inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is most commonly caused in the bones of children's skulls, as well as adults' humerus bones.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these complex fractures, they are thus treated as if separated bones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then return to remembrance of all that is in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I recognize all these types of fractures by detecting them and examining their attempts, as well as the state of the corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The special capillary is known for what is discovered above the bone when it is exposed, and it is cleaned, and pressed upon it, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginnings of the patient's ailments, and if you examine their symptoms by what they signify, it is as if there is vomiting of anger, and expansion, and loss of understanding, and speechlessness, and fainting, and acute fever, and oozing of pus, and burning of those areas, which resemble similar symptoms in higher dispositions. It is deemed that one is not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you experience unexpected accidents, you hope for healing, then you begin to treat them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which causes, since the illness has come to you at the beginning as it comes and this is in the winter days, then know that you must study the appearance of the bone according to all dispositions on the fourteenth day.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then know that you must keep watch over the bone facing it on the seventh day, as what is left of the bone becomes corrupted by the panicle, and accidents happen that we have mentioned.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panicle covering the brain and it is in small parts and inflammation, then know that you must incise the divided and inflamed part as I have mentioned to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you cut off the patient's pain, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you experience a fracture of the bone, pus or abscess cautiously, stop it with something that covers it, and it is advisable to place cloth soaked in vinegar and salt on the affected area, and let the pain rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circular motion around the bone and the removal of the abscess.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is according to one of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you cut the bone with a straight incision tool, and this is its form: Then administer another incision tool to it, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer a yet wider incision tool than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you will need to use various incision tools, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter, with the last ones being very sharp and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their aid to facilitate percussion over the incision to prevent injury to the head and damage to that area.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, remember that you must pierce around the circumference of it before administering the scissors, which are called non-deep cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this way, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone to which it belongs, so that at the cut, its extremity or edge is rounded on the side that leaves the sharp part of it, resembling a small circle or margin, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each one suited to the specificity of each bone, provided that in all parts of the skull, the sharp end of which should be considered, both its length and brevity are according to the amount of specificity of this cut.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three kinds of treatments: When drilling through the fragmented bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and twist it around until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the instrument to another location and apply it where it best reaches the depth or thickness of the ray.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then you should cut with scissors what is between each fragment of the bone, making a thin wound over it, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool, using whatever instruments you have prepared for this purpose, such as pincers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch any part of the healing process.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So, once you have drilled through the bone and it is separated from the healing process if it was previously attached, extract it, take care to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone with a tool similar to scissors, but be sure that it is more delicate and finer than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you break any part of the small or delicate bones, take it with ease as you must from your tools; and then apply a remedy to the wound with linaments and bandages as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is light, without pain, which cuts through Gaul and lauds for great praise; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and manifest, while you have discovered that part, and have paused and left it with the extremity of this slow and gentle cutting tool, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is round and does not enter any cause, and the acute cut is in two parts forward in length, thus when you have done; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cutting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then carefully strike with a small mallet upon the incision of a dislocation until the bone is completely separated, thus freeing it; be certain of not causing damage to the surrounding tissue that you might fear in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the greatest ignoramus among them; certainly, he would be sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If, however, a rupture occurs in the fascia of a muscle attached to a bone, cut through it at its attachment using a curved instrument, and free it from its adhesions, for it is freed from its pain and suffering.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of a bone does not penetrate into the fascia, and what is detached or remains attached to the bone is the fascia itself, with its asperities and subtle textures, then smooth those asperities and eradicate those subtleties using finely sharpened razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it will be possible for you to apply them in any location the most appropriate for their use and the most correct according to how your operation progresses with that fractured bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why you scrape the bone at the beginning with these instruments, and then use them appropriately on the subtle pus of it, and do not cease to do so continuously until you have administered the true pus and the subtle pus of all those affected.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small cracks or subtle fractures, be sure to administer treatment according to what you have learned for their rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is cause that not all those who have studied this art are equally proficient.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us focus on what he has written regarding major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panicle is contracted when you dislocate the bone, then take a cloth from it according to the extent of the wound, immerse that in hot oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth folded or doubled up, immerse that in vinegar and oil, and place it over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to damage the skin; and then apply a poultice with hot water, and do not tighten it unless the wound requires it.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for one or two days until you are certain of the abscess being healed; then remove that and administer medicines as necessary to promote dryness, such as lint and flour, powder from herbs and aristology, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this powder from the medicines and sprinkle it over the wound when they are dry; generally, administer to that person all medicine of proper quality from which he/she abstains and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there be no infection of pus or other; nor do you add any violence to it; for when it is properly applied to the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and destroys it, and causes evil malice towards the illness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the brain, when it is purified of its humors and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether accidents to the illness have occurred, which we have mentioned, knowing that these are all harmful to its treatment.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it does not happen to be a dark color due to the medicine placed upon it, but rather because of that very medicine which causes this darkness, then take some honey and rose-scented oil in equal parts, and with these lines wrap a cloth, and place that over the affected area; and then apply the healing spices suitable for the cure until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	It appears that the text you've provided is part of a medical treatise from the Middle Ages, written in a language akin to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Without further context or a complete text, it's challenging to offer a comprehensive translation. However, based on the excerpt given, here's a line-by-line translation into English:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken in one place but rather in two superior parts or sometimes in one of those small bones, so that it has two bones in it, because the fracture leaves a cartilaginous part, and it is not broken but suffers from attrition, tortuosity, and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small object into their nose to hold that fragment in place, and with the help of an instrument, fix the fracture from within, but also push it gently from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your convenience, and be careful not to cause pain during your operation on the patient's wound.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not affect the inner part, then you must equalize the pressure at the edge of the wound where there is an increase in swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you must do it thusly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And on the first day after the fracture, attempt to restore it if possible; otherwise, apply heat or cold for seven days to maintain rest in the affected area.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a strip of cloth from silk into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part, or two strips, if the fracture is in two parts, making sure each strip is thick enough to fill the nostril cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient healers used to soak the strips in a bath, and change them daily, but I will not do this; instead, I will wrap the cloth with egg albumen mixed with flour powder; and leave it until the bone is healed and the cartilage strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, the nose may be inserted into a place where there is no opening, due to the swelling of the tissues and the pain, preventing inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this treatment is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you prefer, use openings.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if, after using a poultice, the nosebleed persists, apply a new poultice with fresh and warm vinegar or honey.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If nosebleed does not occur after using the poultice, cover it outside with a paste of sesame flour and powder of crushed cloves mixed with egg white, and then hold the nose gently without applying any pressure.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or fractured in small pieces or if they are disjointed, then separate them and extract those that are appropriate for these; and afterwards with the cut, treat it with what adheres and consolidates, and apply suitable poultices.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an internal plague occurs within the nose, you must cure it with warm moistures and administer lead enemas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter IV**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**On the Restoration of the Jawbone when Cracked**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is cracked and the fracture is not accompanied by severe pain, observe whether the fracture is only on the outer side, and not split into two pieces but curved inward at the site of the break. In such cases, its healing is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your right middle finger into the patient's mouth to support it, and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your left middle finger from the outside to gently push and align the fractured parts together.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two parts, you must ensure that you administer extension to both parts according to their correct position so that they can be properly aligned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you experience a concussion of the teeth due to disruption, strengthen those from which you hope to save a thread of gold or silver or cedar; then place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and lay a large sterile drape decently cut, or a piece of gauze of the same length as the mandible; and then secure it from above according to your ability with the ligature and the application, as long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and refrain from eating or drinking anything sour.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should remove and dislodge what has been changed and correct it; apply a powder from a mill, or white of egg, or flour of sesame, since you will have removed the cerot, and place a new bandage over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so, once this annex and the dressing are in place and the bone position is not altered, leave it until healing and strengthening of the fracture occurs; for this fracture usually heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if there is a recurrence of the post-operative infection, administer what we have mentioned as treatment for this infection until it heals, and then remove that infection.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is severe, consider whether it is a complete separation of bone or just fragments, then you must carefully determine which bones should be removed using instruments for their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound of the fracture is narrow, then you should widen it through flapotomy according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then, once you have removed those fragments and it is not yet healed, open the wound again if it was narrow; otherwise, place a new dressing over the wound, and change it as needed until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the muscles cause the fork to break, the fracture is usually in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not occur by accident; and it is more difficult to restore it; or it happens that there are complications, making restoration difficult.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for that operation, when the fracture is its most complicated, you should have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork and another should extend the leg at the site of the break.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then reduce the fracture to its proper form until it is not prominent nor concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, notice that the padding under the patient should be of fabric or wool, and its size according to your need; then extend and elevate the splint and secure it with your hand while reducing the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the splint to the desired position, as it has reached its limit, then have the patient lie on their side, and place a cushion over their musculature, slightly larger than necessary.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The attendant should press on the musculature at the joint, lifting the splint's end towards the ceiling, and then correct the fracture, reducing it with the hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel stiffness in the furcula (hyoid bone) and it is painful, then know that you must cut into it and extract those stiffnesses with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had left the furcula with the instrument that serves to cut; and this is the form of the instrument: a chisel or a steel blade.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concave shape; and its size according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	You may adjust the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, with one end wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound, which you have incised when removing the sagacity of the bone, is wide and there is no danger of infection, then you adjust both lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or you fear infection, then you cover the wound with bandages and poultices according to the amount of the wound's disruption.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an infection occurs, then pour wine mixed with rosin and oil over it and place a bandage on top.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the fracture of the bone, because of its severity and depth, requires an effective plaster, then make a paste from flour milled fine as albumen of eggs, place it on top of the wound with a stoppers made of leather, and let it dry. If needed, add more of that paste and apply double poultices over the stoppers. Then take a thin table knife whose thickness is about three fingers long, place it over the fracture, wrap it in cloth, and secure the cloth around it. After reversing the plaster, rotate the limb to ensure all parts are well secured, and press firmly on the wound to reduce any remaining air bubbles. This is what should not be overlooked.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the bone's star is not broken; and so that you may observe the illness each day, when the ligament softens or you see the star already damaged, then correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient's sleep on their side, and during sleep at night, keep a small cushion under their hip; so that by that, be raised the assistants of the patient from the side of that injury, and thus is elevated the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient bent at the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the bandage unless it occurs in the immediate vicinity or abscess within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the injury to it, and adjust in the tightness and restore that, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and eased according to the need in 28 days, and in some cases in men it is cured in less than that time.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of the patient, but it is not completely fractured, only the edges are damaged.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the lateral part is broken and it is broken in the middle part, and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you should prepare it and reduce it back to its natural state in every way with the help of an instrument as best as possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a powder made from wheat flour and honey on the wound; also, use a duplicate cloth dusted with powdered drugs; and place a thin sheet of tableware over it according to the size of the spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concave with a stopgap and then adjust the sheet equally.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly over the moistened tongue with a gentle pressure on the sheet until it is not removed from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the consistency each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the sheet if it is removed from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula will be restored in ten days or twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore, when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is from the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a lock there, then you split it open and hold it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the fork-shaped spine of the rib in an apoplectic case.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of Fractured Bones.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the bone breaks in the middle of its location and healing tends to fail; but the ends of the bone can still be healed, though they are fragmented and shattered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the accidents of bone when the middle part is broken, it inclines to dislocate and causes great pain, difficulty in moving, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed supine on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press their muscles, adjust their ribs to the contours of two ribs, and be delicate in the operation of it and in the positioning according to every way possible and appropriate for it, so that the shape of the bone recovers.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of sap or cloth and similar materials, wrapped in a drape; be delicate in binding that over the broken bone so as not to harm it; occasionally adjust the bandage according to the curvature of the back, and tighten that which is too loose; constantly consider the bandage at all times, and when it softens, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of that which is causing corrosion, pressure, pain, or abscess in the area, then you loosen and remove that and eliminate the plaster, rectifying what occurred by way of healing; reduce the bandage, if necessary for that; and adjust the stricture until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur casually but in serious places that affect the back; and regarding their ends, away from the point of impact, it does not cause strain to those parts, only because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not hidden from the sense, you must inquire into his condition by touching them.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is such that you treat the fracture as it presents itself, according to the possible manner, within the limits of what covers it, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs tends to the parts inside, it causes the patient severe pain and piercing, just as piercing occurs in those who have pleured, and because the bone is exposed; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of foul-smelling blood; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And now, the ancient remedies are ingeniously designed for that most intricate matter.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from their experience, they say: "Protect the patient from foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the hernia is pushed out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We might also recommend this to prevent any minor complications from turning into severe ones, if it should happen; and if it does happen, you must already provide aid.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also said that some should be stopped from belching and that one should apply something with strength; it is similar to reasoning, but nevertheless, there is fear that the wind could push excess matter to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also said: "One should cover the area with wool that is previously dipped in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, making a seal when you wrap it according to its shape; and then one should treat the illness with food pleurisy cure and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the disease causes severe constriction that does not yield, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the illness; then cut open at the site, expose the broken rib, and apply pressure with the instrument that preserves the integrity, the recollection of which is preceded, and cut through the bone to facilitate extraction.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and apply poultices in rose oil and press upon the site, treating the illness with what covers the abscess within.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And one should raise the side on which they sleep until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck fracture, and they should be treated carefully, resembling the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider that if their muscles are already relaxed, numbed, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, or feel pain when pricked with a needle, then you should know that they will not recover, and in such a state of weakness, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel constriction and pain in the joints and pricking, then know that the pressure on the bone is alleviated and the disease will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that it has already softened, pay attention to those parts where the condition occurs in the most affected area, and when you lie on your side, you gain breathability and control over its will; sometimes, it reoccurs on its own side, and they want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and from then on, do not bother with its treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no other cause occurs, the condition is better and more easily resolved.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is to make an incision at the seat of the abscess with a hot cautery that is dipped in rosin or some other oily substance, and place it over the affected spine several times until the abscess is sedated by the cautery.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now place one of the comfortable and effective bandages firmly over that area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to remove the skin from a bone or any part that has already separated, cover the wound with a dry dressing and support that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, either by stitching if it's large; and carefully treat the affected area with poultices until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of a bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, then you must insert that piece of the left hand into the hole on the right side, and with your other hand, hold the broken bone in place as tightly as possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and keep it strong.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in them, then apply pressure to that area and support it; treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the bowel.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the bowels are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but communication in the extremities of those parts and are sharp at their length and decline to the inner parts; and it causes pain to the patient at the site and puncture, and the limb becomes stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should fold that according to what you have been taught by a similar process so that it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long part or has already declined to the inner parts, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have wrapped it, apply the plaster to it, and then place upon that board of wood or cordwood, tighten with strength over which you do not fear a fracture's puncture nor the star's removal.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Wrap the concave area with something that fills it completely, according to its tightness, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess appears cautiously, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess has subsided, and apply to it what was previously mentioned; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it occurs in the bone's joints or is fractured, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the broken assistant (or 'adjutori' in this context).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a piece of rough wood according to this form...
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And both ends of the ligament are seen, then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Then follow the patient's pain over a side; and afterward, cast out their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the curved part of the wood where it is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And afterward, suspend it over some heavy cause or, if the minister extends it to the parts below, then the doctor should apply pressure with their hands until the fracture returns to its place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their head with their hands; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the pus from below them; each of them extending themselves accordingly.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, tighten your grip on the fracture with ligatures and on another ligament, and each of the two ministers extends themselves in opposite directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is close to the extremity of a muscle, you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and the other side below the fracture towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the shoulder, you should stop the ligament at that place and over the shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse that in easy water and work with it; when it is immersed according to the depth and applied properly, tighten it carefully so as not to cause gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If gangrene occurs, loosen the tightness after the seventh day and place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it to calm the abscess, and then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of tightening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around it; adjust the arm on that support, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unwrap the cloth and tighten on the arm support to keep the arm in place without any movement if there is no cause for it from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that one should place over the fracture a beam that is both wide and strong compared to the other beams; and it should space out between each beam the width of the finger, and the length of the beams according to the break with three parts from the whole length.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the beams with the tightening mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the tightening over the fracture site should be more tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the further the fracture is extended, the less the tightening should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, depending on the position of the beams and the tightening as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, so you proceed.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and the strings within on the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And thereafter, consider the dressing in all parts for three days to prevent any further occurrence of pain or inflammation; or restrict the food that reaches the member due to an excessive tightness; and thus rectify everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that nothing further will occur from it, do not loosen the ligature but leave it as is for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm compress filled with wool on the affected limb, and consider at all times during the night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved from the broken member, or that the dressing become soft, thus rectify it according to your ability.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And hold the diet of the patient as ordered before, so that the diet is subtle at first and then gradually becomes stronger; and now you will notice that the patient's diet becomes thicker.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the assistant and the leg support is that they should be tight for 10 to 12 days; and now you will notice that they become looser and baths should be administered and they should be treated with ointments that correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is old and infected, you will not loosen that ligament and stitches within one day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of the broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the upper arm; of these, one is smaller, and is what is known as the little finger side, and the other is larger, and is where the little finger joins the upper arm.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the main or minor fissure is cut open, it is usually done at one time, but many small ones are cut together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small fissure is cut open from above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is much easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fissure of the intestine is cut open below, the fracture of it is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the most severe case is when two bones are cut together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut is the small fissure from above, it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it, as its small size facilitates its reattachment before it heals.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large fissure is what is cut, then it requires greater extension to heal properly.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are together torn, then be sure that you press the extraction most strongly.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And be sure that you hold the shape of your hand for the restoration of it and the extension of it spread over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand on top of them, more than all the others, and the acuteness of the pain is below all the others, and the patient lies on a carefully prepared bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place another cushion in front of him at his height or turn it to the side, so that the illness does not get worse.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends his free arm below his waist with his hand or according to his ability, and another minister extends above it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor aligns the bone inside according to the best shape that he can achieve.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the healing of the bone there are delays, you will pierce and reduce all the weight to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separated condition that affects the bone and it does not respond to your hopes of restoration, then you must end it and hold it in the manner we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe, you have already dealt with this particular case, and so take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, you shall line it with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, acting with caution between expertise and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over that slight gap until the abscess yields; then remove the plaster and apply a new one prepared from powder of flour mixed with yolk clay, and place more bandages; and let the bandage be the one that is pressed firmly upon that fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fragments together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater force and vehemence, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or lower parts increases, lessen the pressure slightly according to how the recollection of pain in the beginning of the chapter precedes it.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to secure them should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, as you perceive a problem in the member, then apply water to the member until the pressure ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And allow the limb to relax until it rests, then gently return the restriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the restriction is already softened and the bone has returned to its original state, resembling those before, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nutrition to the limb is prevented from reaching it due to excessive restriction, for then you must soften that a little and allow it for some days until the nutrition flows to it, then gently strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within approximately 2-3 days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by their virtue of active movement, and they should sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or much sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the arrangement of the circumstances and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Finger**
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal properly unless the underlying causes are addressed.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a hand or finger experiences fracture or dislocation, you must ensure the patient remains calm and lie them down with the affected limb extended. Then, gently support the hand over the injured area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then, the physician should carefully extend the broken bones and align them so they grow together properly.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover with a clean bandage and stoppers, otherwise infection may occur; and lay the sheet over it according to the extent of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the joints of the fingers, then make a cut on the inside of the palm and make it look like a length of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their fractured finger; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cloth wrapped around the body should be like a sheet in which it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to how much it covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover with a sheet and another sheet on the other side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and supported; and tighten the bandage, thus as it is revolved to the right position between the said ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you suffer a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the little finger, it should be wrapped as it is covered and then tightly tied to the palm, and if you wish, place a small right splint beneath it so that the fracture is elevated and not aggravated.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other joints, for example in the middle finger, or index, or little finger, or ring finger, then it should be wrapped around the affected finger; or all fingers can be wrapped together according to their sequence, which is better; or a small splint can be placed beneath it, as we have said for the little finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and return that person to a safe disposition, with due consideration for the post-operative state—in contrast to what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described in the narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	**Chapter XIV**
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a broken hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone, being mobile, often breaks and is perceived as pain according to its position in relation to the surrounding areas and the dominant inflammation.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in this way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed around the fracture, and the patient is positioned on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the physician extends the ligament to its proper position according to quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary to open the hip joint, then the ligament should be pulled towards the opposite side at the socket of the thigh, allowing the extension to occur, and another ligament placed around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture seems to be extensive, then make the proper ligature on it and extend the splint to the affected parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should equalize the bones with both hands while returning them to their natural position and joining them with a good connection; he must ensure that he covers the area with bandages and compression, otherwise the member may be affected.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens in the infected member, then leave it for a few days until the infection subsides, and later return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be done thus: it must cover the fracture with a hard cloth, and fold it two or three times, removing the excess; then wrap the splint until it reaches the thigh and the root of the bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and leg close to the joint, bringing the ends of the cloth from the joint higher than both parts, then turn over the leg and thigh again removing what is superfluous from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your hand over the thigh at the location of that fracture, and place one stick on the bones of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the space between the thigh and leg with soft cloth to prevent constriction.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin with a strong constriction around the middle on the location of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move farther away from the fracture site, your constriction should be less severe and lighter and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the cloth to the joints while it reaches the toe's cavity, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other side to prevent the ligament from moving from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then carefully apply the compression to that area, ensuring it does not cause damage or inflammation to the affected member, and if any cause arises from those, then take care to remove it, rectifying what happens immediately, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone that causes it to be weak, then cover it as best you can; if not, wrap and treat it, and cure what preceded the recollection until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be adjusted with bindings, as we have said in the aid and support for the leg.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it in this manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, then apply the other leg as necessary, but it is important that the limb that was injured does not limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a month or two, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV.**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side.**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often results in a prolonged healing process, frequently accompanied by inflammation and stiffness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it happens that the fracture results in only a crack or break in its parts, then this is considered a minor injury, but it can still be a source of great pain and discomfort, which has been the subject of much discussion.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, and this should be added and connected as much as possible by means of alignment and ease of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and press it onto that round stain, if you need to; tighten around it with a tight bandage as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, thus taking care and similar to those that oppose any accident that is appropriate for its healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as restoration is made to the arm as a whole, and the operation on them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone of the ankle is broken with a subtle crack, the leg is shattered in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone of the ankle is broken with a strong crack, you will hear a pop, and it is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the bones according to that agreement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is clean without displacement, extension should be less and more gentle, and it will be beneficial for your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you align the bones and complete the entire operation, you will take pieces of hard wood where the causes are left alone, and they are made entirely of palm branches; tie them from those to which a slight roughness is required, do not harm the hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from the outside to the deepest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each leg separately in two layers of cloth according to its length, placing one at the junction of the thigh and the other at the opposite end, ensuring they remain within the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then attach the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle position, as this structure prevents the leg from bending at the joints, and it stays in place properly.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the leg, and it is placed over the limb to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when such pain is truly severe.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And you should consider each leg daily, examining it for any issues, such as dislocation or inflammation, or other similar causes. If a problem arises from one of these, then rest the limb until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not always fracture entirely; sometimes other bones of the foot do, and the toes rarely fracture but may suffer atrophy due to their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do fracture and those bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient's foot rests on the ground prepared thus as they recover.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and apply pressure to them, and squeeze them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and stop over it, and place the sole of the foot on a small table with two ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then stretch the foot gently with a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with bandages and other causes from which it needs relief.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is as well known to you.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if someone says it is broken, then restore them, entangled as they are with your skill and expertise in the restoration of said parts of the body.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the said broken bone gently according to its length, and slightly on one side; and return the foot to this table which is properly adjusted for you, and stretch its structure gently.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken of the bones is two or three or more parts, then you should place each finger gently wrapped in a linen bandage, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to hold the foot's belly properly.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which are told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and be wary of every accident that could affect it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the condyle of the femur, the os of the penis, and the scrotum of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the condyle of the femur is broken, it causes a severe pain in the knee, and you should incline it slightly towards the torso, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife should fill the condyle with something, and it should be done in the condyle of him likewise with hope; and the woman should be cut open, and slowly raise the legs of the child one by one, so that everything is removed until it is before the opening of the condyle with hope, and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on their back, and when they want to urinate, facilitate the flow and collect the urine, then reduce it and return it according to the same manner as before, and return them to their initial position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do the same for seven days or around those times, as it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the patient's body a tube of canvas; then insert the entire bladder into his scrotum, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated within the scrotum, as the rupture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be filled with heat and left for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then apply in the restoration and healing of it what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture signifies to you in the best dispositions for treatment and restoration, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	If the fracture is in the arm of a man, take a cloth from above and place it on that area; then wrap it with a drape, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or around those times, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the Restoration of Bone Fractures When They Are Infected
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one to whom a fractured bone becomes infected, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the hip or a similar bone, that you cauterize and cut into it immediately if the conditions for flebotomy indicate it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the disease exudes pus, then you must hold to its retention as if you were sprinkling ashes over it with a fan, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then it begins to restore the fracture in that member on the third day, and do not prolong this, if you do not risk an abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess does occur cautiously, then you must delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third, seventh, and tenth days, for you might cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is broken and protruding from the uncovered wound, then you must be careful to perforate and reduce it, using your hands as easily and with as little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not within your preparation and the condition of it requires your own hands, then you must reduce it with your own hands, using a suitable instrument; an instrument that is made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and whose width corresponds to the extent of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have several of these instruments of different sizes for the treatment of all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be made in such a way, with a slight roughness, so that it is not folded too much during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It should have a sharp point at its edge, so that the margin is in its extremes; and it should be made to extend from above with a thick tendency, and from below to fit the spaces within.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called "voluntary mouth of the hernia" in Greek, thus it is a rare case.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the part that requires the acute end of it to be elevated above the edge of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should be done at once so that the bone returns to its place, and no further complications arise.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so try to intertwine the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and you do not take the instrument by good assumption, then you must insert the end of that bone into the instrument as it has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you are unable to reduce the bone to this completely that we have recommended, then cut it with the instrument that convenes to him from among the incisors that we have said; or saw that part with one of the saws in any way possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then rasp that which remains on the bone of roughness and small cuts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient experiences severe pain, knowing that the bone has not returned to its natural place, then you know that great improvement has been conferred upon the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete and you apply a black astringent cloth, especially in summer, do not place it directly on the wound or any other cause where there is oil, so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then you administer stones at the appropriate time during the complete restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can incise the tissue with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, leading to death or corruption and severe pain in their patients, which is unhealthful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the stiffness is light, flexible, different from the stiffness of other fractures,
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is great or a severe illness, and you are concerned about further bad accidents that we have described, and you feel pain in that place, then do not press down on it, but rather wrap it with a tight cloth of hard sheets and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the plague has begun for a day or two, and there is swelling in it, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and apply some medicine, such as we usually use to treat plagues, with ointments containing tetracycline and similar substances.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to wash the wound and observe the plague each morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the infection flows from it to the parts beyond with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated or separated from the limb, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to prevent the plague from spreading further.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those parts that are separated, remove and extract them; those that are not separated, put the instrument and cause pain, pierce to incise those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If it happens that the plague is covered with sores or ulcers, or any other kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply to each one of these what suits them for their cure, which is preceded by a description in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I should say and what you should do: when the swelling breaks, it protrudes over the member along with the bones of the thigh and the supporting structures, resembling those of the larger members, and you must not attempt to drain it, nor extract it, as you might otherwise cause death; after cleansing it, let it heal on its own for a period of about 5-10 days, and treat the plague if you have observed it, but leave it alone if not.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of hernia that occurs in the scar tissue of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Various complications occur with this hernia in the scar tissue of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is hindered by the shape of the member; thus, it prohibits the member from its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the hernia is recent and administer those medicines that have stopped it thus far, such as aloes, senna, digests, cramp-relieving herbs, and others; take some or all of these, and apply those with a styptic quality, or white of an egg, or sour milk, and press them onto the hernia in a compressive manner.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And if the tightness does not relax for several days, then release it and apply another treatment, as long as the hernia persists; or use a plate of lead laid gently on the area, as lead has the property to reduce any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is already given that the joint is in a twisted and tight state due to necessity, then divide that by the most appropriate part of it, cut off the excess and prominent parts, or quickly remove them until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	**Capitol XX1.**
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture, once restored, it is appropriate to wrap the delicate member tightly according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, it is appropriate to wrap the recovered limb tightly, but this should be done for only a few reasons: namely, excessive healing of the ligament and its binding; due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments that prevents proper nutrition from reaching the limb; excessive accumulation of fluid; inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or weakness of blood flow in the affected area due to exhaustion or debility caused by the illness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this involves restricting the patient's diet, making their skin supple while increasing the flow of blood to the affected area, and applying baths, needles, and joy (possibly indicating massage or other soothing techniques) to it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	They then apply pressure to the limb to facilitate the flow of nutrients, or continue washing it with lukewarm water, until the nutrient flow is restored and the limb returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of their repair is forbidden.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of it from crookedness and bulging of the fractured bone should be done, and this is how the form of the member is corrected, however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation; as long as you receive the advice of one who considers that member as newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Indeed, there have been many foolish doctors and healers on our land who have done this, and this operation is highly disdained, losing great fear of the sign of which it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the claudication and bulging are recent, then they should be immersed in a tepid water bath in which there are herbs that soften them, also covered with fennel and razing, and similar to those; and an ointment of softening plasters should be made with it, or the mud from the roots of alder, or olive oil, and applied to it; or the presidents of fat figs, intertwined with the women's hair, resembling those used in the consolidant medicines called amermans.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by repeated gentle friction on the most humid parts, and also by moving the member at regular intervals throughout the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already progressed and is strong, it becomes a stone and requires surgical treatment, then one must remove the pus if present and ensure the continuity of the bone is preserved, and cut away what is superfluous from the pressure of that part on the bone using fine scissors, and provide ease to that area in need, with care and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De sermo en dislocacio.	**On Dislocation**
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its normal position, resulting in a loss of movement, distortion of the body part's shape, and causing severe pain and significant injury to the affected area.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when there is some dislocation, you should act promptly to reduce it, and not delay its reduction, because if it's delayed, the location becomes inflamed and strongly contracted, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so it is not advisable to move or stretch it during the inflammation, as spasms and severe pain can result from such actions.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this occurs, you should immediately perform a fluoroscopy of the patient, and then place something cold between their thighs to help reduce the inflammation; and then immerse the affected member in lukewarm water with oil, and gently reduce it.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the water mentioned, which will return to its proper place in due time.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation as mentioned above, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both mandibles are dislocated, if they do not return to their places; the displacement of both is caused by either a partial removal and slight softening, or a complete dislocation and swelling, so that upon the onset of the injury, the patient cannot open his mouth, nor can he close it, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	If the dislocation is slight, it may return to its proper position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to promptly administer a gentle reduction, and not delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the surgeon holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers are outside which equalize them; and commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and release those that go from one part to another; and the doctor equally holds the jaw and repositions it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administration of evaporation with water and oil should be done until a slight reduction of both is achieved, without delaying the complete reduction of both.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then a compress of cloth should be placed over those parts with wax and oil applied, and also use linnen to facilitate movement easily.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient's rest on their back with their head between two pillows, so they do not wince to the right or left, and do not force any cause; having taken their food, let them use a lion's fork until the pains are relieved and their jaws are unclenched, then they may eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated without straining the patient's mouth during eating, drinking, or coughing, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places, then fevers and persistent sweating occur, and the patient's belly is severely upset, and they also vomit pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and often, within a few days, that person who experiences this dies.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the furca (spine) and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furca (spine) is not displaced from its place within the body due to the continuation of the muscle; however, sometimes it is displaced towards the outside, and this is described in terms of sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it (the patient) is that they return to their previous state, with the pain remaining in their back and extending their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then squeeze the area with your palm strongly, as it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then apply pressure to that compress and poultice, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Place the extremity of the bone that is dried and continues to be attached to it, so that it is not dislocated on any day; then cover it and reduce it as we have said and as your equipment allows.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the plaster, poultices, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this treatment, the cure is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Chapter XXVI**
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated in any ordinary sense, but according to three manners; of which one is when it is detached at the attachment point on either side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the first is that it is dislocated at the attachment of its muscle, and this requires treatment; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And primarily it is dislocated and comes out at the attachments on the sides, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but more often in those where there are many muscles, it is difficult to remove.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people experience this condition due to a blow or accident, and the muscle of it is surrounded by inflammation from a bruise, and it is cut off because it was already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So, you will understand that you need to be very careful with it, and then proceed with the treatment for its cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon separates from its attachment; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find the tendon separated at the concave end of the muscle, leaving the tendon attached to the touch of the muscle head as if by a hook, and the patient cannot move their hand to its normal position nor limit its movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the dislocation is in the foot or ankle and you find clear evidence of contact, it cannot be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, gentle reduction is possible when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the attending practitioner raises the patient's hand above them; then he places his fingers on the tendon of the dislocated joint, holds it firmly in place, strengthens the joint in its position, and the practitioner raises the patient's hand and extends it; then he lets go so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It is not possible to accurately translate this text without further context and knowledge of the specific dialect or medical terminology used. However, based on the given structure and words, a tentative translation could be:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is made to lie on their back and rest with their testicles hanging down, awaiting that they be lubricated between relaxation and tension, and the doctor places his foot over the expectant area, lifts the head of the muscle towards the vertical, pulls the patient's testicles away from the opening, and another assistant holds the patient's scrotum so that it is not pulled away, for in this way, it will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: so make it that another man be present who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, and insert his muscle between the testicles and lift the testicles up towards the opening until the patient's scrotum is suspended in the air, and have another pull the patient's testicles away from the abdominal opening.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else may be suspended, for this one will soon return to its dislocation.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with a rounded head, like a mortaring pestle, not too thick or too thin; then it is positioned beneath the patient; drapes are placed over the head of the stick, and the pain remains according to the length of the stick, and then the doctor's hand extends to the parts on the other side; and the patient's body part is strengthened from the other side so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is about two arms' breadth, and its diameter is four fingers, and its thickness is removed from the center according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then cover the rounded head with lion's drapes so that the stick does not touch the pain.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place yourself so that the patient's thigh is between your knees, and stretch your hand or arm over the foot within the gaps, and wrap the foot around the leg and arm and the end of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then position your arm on a scale according to its width, and stretch your other hand to the gaps, while the other side is suspended from the opposite end, so that the joint can be reached shortly after.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And once the instrument is placed as you are able, and you see that you have positioned the thread of the instrument with a hopeful tension from both sides equally, then prepare a paste by mixing fine powder and egg album on all the muscles, turning them away from each other, and tighten the thread gently; then wrap the ligament around the paste, attach your hand to the patient's leg, and leave it for seven days without moving your hand.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient's food intake is limited, as long as the member is supported, since it is easier to heal them.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then gradually increase the food intake and encourage movement; if it stops and does not become weak, then healing has occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or other cause, then it should be treated with a pointed cautery, as explained in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after nine days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are removed from him several times, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then know that the nerves in it, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never stay in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is affected, you must reduce the foot and ankle or the fragments behind, by force and extension of the limbs, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both these strictures should be treated, and the other one cared for until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the healing becomes grave in the member and there is delay in its movement, then the disease uses many baths at times until that gravity is removed and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the healing of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all parts, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And take care to cover them, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes near the infected gangrenous point, because if it reaches the infected gangrenous point, its reduction is difficult, and it is unlikely that they will be completely cured; especially when it is in the posterior regions, because it is more dangerous than all other types of dislocation, causes greater pain, and can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when reduction is possible, is that two hands be placed on it, extending them and opening the body's joints with the fingers of both hands together, or with the palm's root within it, until it returns to its proper place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the anterior region, then return it by bending one hand with the other, striking the thigh at the root of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong pressure.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And indeed, two ministers should stretch their arms, and hold that sight by two ministers so that it is not dislodged from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then he should rotate his arms through all parts, as the cloth is wrapped long over his hand, or lint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that this may relieve those causes which aid in lubricating the joint and facilitate its return.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the hernia should be placed over that paste in which there is tightness and execution with white of egg, and it should be extracted with ease and descends strictly, and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone, and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from him and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strained, repeat the application of the plaster and the lotion, and leave it for some days until it is completely removed; then take it off.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If an accident occurs during the reduction of a joint, especially if it is in motion, then apply moisturizing baths and gentle friction, and compress, until it is relieved; or place a heating pad over the affected joint, as it may be due to excessive movement; and leave it covered with a bandage for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then secure that position, and immerse the affected part in a bath; and when dry, gently rub the joint with warm friction, repeating the process of heating and friction until it becomes numb from lack of movement.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	In the immersion bath, until it is calm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand on that moist and scalded opening of the wound and press down upon it; do this several times, as that is humid and returns to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the shoulder may be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate; in contrast to other joints, it is crucial to act quickly in reducing it as soon as it is dislocated, before the area becomes numb or develops an ulcer.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their hand, while the doctor places his or her hand or palm over the joint, and gently pushes it back to its position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the patient should lie down with their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred before that affects the patient's back, then the doctor's hand should be positioned intrinically over the table towards that joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if this happens quickly, that is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage around them, leave it, and do not worry, as they will not suffer or be able to resist the reduction of the hernia for more than a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, consider the Roman joint according to its flexibility; do not force the patient or cause them pain, but rather soften the hand and use a pointed cautery near the joint's location, which will provide relief and prevent further issues.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the illness returns, place your hand on the compress we have prepared and let it rest and be strengthened for several days; then release it and place it again and exercise your hand upon it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some weakness occurs in it, apply warmth with water and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter XXIX.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the Treatment of Dislocated Joints**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the joints are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated, either on the back of the hand or on the palm or belly, pinch the joint and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to that narrative, continue to stretch it and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise movement, and do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and suspend it to that part and perform the first operation on it until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the chapter number, without containing specific content.)
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of displaced spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the spinal vertebrae in the back or neck become completely dislocated, it causes immense pain as the muscles around them spasm, and at such times, it is not easy to cure, for death often comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient cannot manage the pain on their own, and often experiences relaxation in some parts of the body, such as one leg or both legs or one arm or both arms, or even a spinal vertebra returns to its place; for often it happens that they are dislocated in four places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, when it is dislocated at the rear parts and called "gelbозitát" (a term likely referring to a specific type of dislocation or spinal condition).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for it is that you consider whether the blueness occurs from puerperal fever, because at that time there is neither cure nor healing for all of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where you see this due to chance or impact or similar to those, the ancients spoke of treatment methods in lengthy speeches, of which the greatest benefit returns; and you have already been inconvenienced by that of which there is little excuse due to the excessive use, through my close proximity to understanding, to which I have here exposed and shaped from various instruments of which I will now demonstrate and space out that very one.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in the blueness that occurs from sudden movement in the foot, there is neither cure nor healing for it; similarly, in that which is caused at two joints.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And for those, only the one that occurs in the back itself, through what you have reconnected, is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be laid on their back with their legs drawn up close to the wall, and they should be given warm compresses to prevent the pain in their legs.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick should be placed, with one end on the ground at the patient's foot and another stick across their other foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, not fixed in a hole, and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then cover the patient's head and leave the tight-binding gently on their limbs; extend the end of the binding to the stick that is against their head, and tie it to them; and tighten the other strap over their hips, keeping them in place on the bed; and adjust all the bindings and tie them to the other stick which is against their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then gently extend the bandage from the foot, and ensure that neither the feet nor the ligaments in their places where they are fastened are compressed, though they should not be too tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return to their natural position.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three arm-lengths, and dig into the wall which we have said is nearest to the malady, a place where the end of the table can reach.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, pressing gently until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open it up and turn the patient's head; and since you must be on the ground, place the top of the patient's thigh at the back of your two fists, their length being equal to one arm, and the top of their thigh firmly in the palm of each hand, so that no movement occurs.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take one fist-sized round object on which to turn it, and twist it in the two grooves of each fist.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the turn is formed, its length being equal to one palm where it turns; and in the other two fists, they are similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the patient's foot at the turn where its head is, and the ligaments that you have tightened on their thighs in the turn that is directed towards their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies heat to the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is heated, then apply a dry, powdery substance over the paste, and stop; then place a cloth over the paste from a table whose width is about three times or so the length of the affected area, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then use the mentioned treatment, utilizing subtle nutrition for healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any threat is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and soothe should be administered through a prolonged course of treatment as we have recommended; and such treatment involves applying a thin layer of lead to the area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there occurs an imminent danger at the end of the spine bones, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should already fear because no covering will protect it from this disease, as it will strongly cause you to experience death.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter XXXI.**
De curacio de anca dislocada.	**On the Healing of a Dislocated Hip.**
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the muscle's joint should not be dislocated alone, but it happens to those who experience dislocation in the other joints with lesser removal and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four manners, for it can be dislocated inward or outward, or in front or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated in the inner joints, slightly in the front or rear joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation in the inner joints is as follows: when you adjust the patient's leg towards the healthy side, the affected leg becomes longer, and the pain is more acute than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their foot in the normal way; this is where the pointed cautery should be applied from behind, so that the tip of the bone already reaches here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs is in the outer joints; it is that the accidents of the affected part are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs at the front joints is that they expand their limb fully but still experience pain on the affected side; it cannot bend normally towards the front, and if pressed, it goes to the rear parts; its urine is retained, and its testicle becomes inflamed, and you should move the patient's leg over the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one who experiences dislocation in the rear parts is that he does not stretch out the pain, nor can he bend what he bends the knee, and the leg is shorter on this side than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the matter is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main consideration in the reduction of this dislocation is that you should, when the dislocation is old and long-standing, think that it has already been reduced by itself or slowly improved with treatment, so it is not appropriate to apply excessive reduction and risk causing more harm; therefore, in such a case, thorough observation is required.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	If it is a recent dislocation and one of the four types, you should do what follows: turn the joint back to its place and extend it both inwardly and outwardly, and then to the right and left, for it returns firmly on its own without needing other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Perhaps, if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant to extend the patient's leg from below, or hold their feet, or wrapping cloth that is tight over their distressing area; and another minister should stretch your hand from above so that he can place his fingers between their legs; and tighten the wrapping cloth around the root of the thigh, and have another minister turn the end of the cloth to prevent its slipping.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is either extending the leg or the part from within to open up the angle at the fork of the bone, or behind the part towards the back of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these at once, while the patient's illness is lifted to his/her body off the ground and hangs loose.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is especially unique to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary for every kind of treatment to address its specific cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of a dislocated hernia, when it is dislocated within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be pulled tight across the area where the hernia protrudes between the top of the hernia and the spot that remains free from pain; and the ligament should be extended over the part from the angle to the highest point of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's legs, press the swollen area of the affected hernia, and stretch it outward vigorously to ensure it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is of the lightest cure to which this member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused on your side and you do not disobey the treatment of this type of cure for all, then you must tie both feet of the patient together with a strong ligature, lighter, on both the toes and both the soles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be four times the other, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the leg, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it should be from the ground a quantity of two arms' length.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to reduce the head of the hernia, and suspend it from another young man, and another young man should decrease the hernia with forceful pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	During the reduction, when there is a dislocation outside its usual place, it is necessary to hold the patient in a position of flexion as we have recommended regarding the frozen state; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh and on their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then place two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and another on their head; and place a moist cloth over the infected area to prevent the stick from causing further damage when extending the joints, so that the extension of the parts remaining will not be hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each minister should extend their part, and the doctor guides the reduction according to the art (or technique).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey reversals, it will be very beneficial; otherwise, persist diligently in that which we have said regarding the flexion for that unfreezing.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient lies on their back without movement.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, narrate over the pain; the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then with his other hand, he gently pulls to correct the dislocation, leaving it in its place.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not ensure that the patient is extended at the joints, but rather elevated above the ground; once you have confirmed that he is resting on a hard surface, thus as we said about the placement of the body on two surfaces, and his face and ligaments are slightly stretched, as we also mentioned, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be administered compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, since you extend from the hernia two thighs, and when you see those hernias and the patient extrudes their thigh and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and now you adjust two things, place a plaster, and wrap a bandage so that the wound is not harmed in any part; and keep the hernia at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the ligature and plaster, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those hernias in appearance, then you will know that the displacement is already closed, and therefore release the patient from rest.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a plaster to that area, remove it according to your initial stretching, and leave it in rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then gently pull it, causing the patient to walk slowly for some days, until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	**On the treatment of dislocated joints.**
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	A joint is dislocated in three manners: when it shifts outward, inward, or to the sides, and not forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated joint is that you apply a splint to the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of dislocation is that you correctly apply the splint, so that it extends properly if possible; attach the patient's back to their face, and hold their foot between your hands; then carefully attach the joint to your palms, and place those between your fingers over the patient's dislocated joint with strength, and another assistant should extend their leg until the joint returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and afterwards remove the bandage.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not indicated, then administer strong extensions to the ligaments of which mention has been made in the preceding description of the treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii represents the chapter number, not a part of the text itself.)
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot, at times, is damaged by slight removal, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either inside or outside the joints.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen, proceeding towards the joint where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation is a gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and then wrapped until it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must cease the patient's movement directly, and have a strong and capable assistant apply pressure behind the back at the middle point of the dislocated joint.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you must place your right hand on the top of the foot from the dominant side, and your left hand below the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand make two movements to the left, and then extend your left arm; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the right side of the leg, and work on it.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then gently push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the third attempt, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one movement or two according to this manner, and turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is impossible for you to reduce it in this way as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch out a firm piece of wood between their thighs, and insert something between them, and cover them with a blanket so that the hernia does not protrude.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister should take hold of his limbs, and another minister extend the foot with its toes or the bandage that lies over the arch of the foot; and another minister should extend this or that minister against the extension of his part, and the padding should be retained between the thighs of the patient to prevent the movement of his body beyond its extent.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor should re-align the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh at its joints, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation has returned and it is declared that the reduction is healthy, then apply a poultice and reinforce that bandage tightly, and bind the foot with bandages to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so that the bandage over that area is not tight and causes no harm.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the swelling softens, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third or fourth day, remove that, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to move that space, be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and then this will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you suffer an apothema (fever), cover him with what we have mentioned before, in the place where our narrative precedes, rather than applying remedies and baths, until it is remedied.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the joints of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Understand that one who is dislocated should be wrapped in a narrow extent of cloth; and for what is not difficult, it should be lifted before.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some sensitive part of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on the ground or on a table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand by the foot, place your hand on it to prevent any pressure on the joints, and press gently with the foot as it returns, ensuring that the dislocation is reduced and does not reappear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place a board beneath the patient's foot which supports the entire foot, having two ends, and tighten it gently but firmly for three days; afterward, remove it and allow the patient to walk with rest for several days until healing is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Regarding the types of dislocation that occur due to disease, fracture, or any other condition.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these conditions occurs and you focus on the treatment and restoration of it, sudden complications may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, it is not appropriate to presume over the treatment of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, gradually, without haste or arrogance; and use medicinal treatments that give gradual relief from symptoms, leaving the diagnosis to divine judgment, unless you hope for health from death, alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, as soon as possible, strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than applying a symptomatic cure.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns to its proper place, then administer a gentle treatment to prevent further inflammation and cure the pain with appropriate dry compresses.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are separated, then you must open their locks, and treat it as we have said for the simple ailments of this type that precede in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear, as my prediction has preceded it; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more beneficial to your true body in due time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, the words of Albucasim are perfectly ended, from which God may be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
