Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus commence the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, having completed this book, the last on the science of medicine, through the completion of its contents, and due to the explanations contained therein, and through the declarations it makes, I believe you have now grasped fully this treatise, which is a part of the most high art of surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, considered the most high art in our region and at our time, is entirely shrouded in secrecy, as its science is greatly neglected; only a few small descriptions of it remain in the books of the Ancients, which have led to much confusion and error, as the understanding of its principles is closed off, and its power extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I have found it necessary to revive the order of this treatise through a second method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and in order that the forms of cautery instruments and other surgical tools may be included for the sake of explanation and preparation, which is essential.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why our artful healers no longer have their hands full in this our time is that the art of medicine is complex, and requires expertise in the science of anatomy, which reveals how everything within [the body] functions and relates to one another; and knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names and movements of these; and the veins, both pulsing and static, and their locations.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, but in practice it is small, especially in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said this at the beginning of this book; for those who do not know what we have told you about anatomy, they are not exempt from making mistakes that will lead to the death of men, as you have seen many of them who are formed in this science but lack real knowledge and rely on theory and experiment.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You see a foolish doctor who has incurred an infected abscess in the thigh of a woman and incised some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flows within, causing the woman to die between his legs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who prescribed a stone from a man who had passed it in his state; the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with part of his bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already summoned help to extract it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient's condition, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who was taking payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he operated on a black crusted ulcer that was deeply infected in the patient's thigh; because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture above the wound, using poultices and planks with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then release it according to their desires, and apply rest, and take away the swelling for some days, and command that we loosen the ligament; and thus, until the matter and the pain in the foot are resolved, and brought to healing.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have been called to loosen the ligament, and by doing so, achieve tranquility and thus alleviate their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, then it cannot be restrained, and the corruption continues to spread throughout the member until the danger of the illness increases.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it increases under the control of its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the pain in the cancer is pure melancholic humour, and it does not cover that it will reach him with a sharp weapon, but rather affects the member in which it suffers most.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be carefully devised in two stages: first, the operation associated with health, and second, the work which is perilous to the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this in every place of this book where we speak of operations involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to pay attention and set aside that which leads people astray from speaking and shames you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means for the grace of God leading to salvation and glorious success, and set aside the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and cease using those things that make you fear, so that your confidence in your faith and in His name does not desert you: for greater glory remains for you, and more honor both in this world and in the next, to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	They already dissected in some of their own organs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad diseases improperly, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter organized within the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and also with venoms, and with extracts of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and repositioning, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a well-ordered chapter on internal foot care and the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and the remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what conditions cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents of it is long and prolix, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, so I will content myself with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cauterization will apply to the entire universal connection, which is of material or its material, except for two connections, which are connections whose material is itself.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the connection that is dry and lacks material, opinions differ; some say that cauterization is beneficial to it, while others claim the opposite, stating that cauterization is not appropriate for ailments characterized by quality and dryness, as the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be counterproductive to treat a condition that is dry and lacking in moisture with heat.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who claim the opposite state that cauterization is beneficial for all dry and dehydrated ailments in the bodies of men, as when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the connection with fire, you find the body of a man to be rough.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And he says through the argument of those who claim this, that he himself has already discovered it through experience several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate for someone who has already been exhausted and practiced in the chapter of cautery for further training, and who knows the diversity of the composition of people and the disposition of ailments in their bodies, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other situations, there is no need for fear, especially in dry and humid ailments, as all doctors are agreed on these, and they are not discordant in the application of cautery to them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery over medicine, for fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member to be cauterized, and does not affect other members with its heat except with a slight discomfort.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of medicine combined with fire reaches that member from which it departs, and strongly drives away the sick member of difficult healing, and strongly assists.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Light, due to its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this but exceeds. It is already known to us from experience and from a long service of studying the art based on the truth of causes; for this reason, I excuse you from the length of my speech. And if it were not that it is hidden from me in this brief moment, I would reveal to you the secret fire, and the quality of the operation in the body and its expulsion through which you expel illnesses, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that the times of disagreement from which these diseases arise are in the springtime, when it is most convenient to make cauterization and apply pressure.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by accidental time is overshadowed by the healing of what is thrown off by cauterization, and even more so if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, severe and extensive, which do not suffer from delay, because it is feared those that come with evil, that it is better to have a little damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so do not sit on your feet, my children, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who value such things, for that disease which is healed by cautery does not fully recover, and leaves a scar.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine which alters the composition and dries up moisture, which is the cause why pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet doctors may use cautery excessively over medicine because of their desire for its power, virtue, and the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the nature of the illness and its location, and the power of it, and what is prepared within the body from the addition of excesses in it, and what has come upon it from food and similar causes; for the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in members with few excesses and moisture, just as a tooth cautery for pain and similar things, so it may not return that pain in it, but this is done in small measures.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is common in popular speech that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and although it may seem the rightest thing to do, they believe that it is not a cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause through cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not so much as when one applies the methods of healing in certain ailments, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, one administers a cautery to benefit from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it follows that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of the gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only burns in some bodies, and cauterization on that spot is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you make a cauterization with fire from gold, it is not clearly declared, because the amount of gold you want determines the severity of the burn, and since you prepare to receive friction; and if you place it over the flame, the gold melts in the fire, and sometimes some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman can catch them due to the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterization with iron must be made more gently and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to other chapters, and you have organized those within the feet first, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	With a cold cautery for head pain due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers upon the servant the benefit of humidity and coldness as remedies for various accidents, which are two causes of severe and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called rigor, from the head to the parts of the senses and ears, flowing excessively, and also from sleep, toothache, and throat pain, and generally from any ill health that arises from cold, similarly in cases of paralysis, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: first, command that the illness be evacuated using a laxative on the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then he commands them to shave their head, and make that cut between your thighs on a prepared bench, and place their hands on the patient's feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then he places the palm of his hand, pressing it against the root of the nose between the patient's feet.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the swelling in the affected area has subsided, mark that place with a sign, and then apply the olive-shaped pointed cautery to it.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then he places that over the healthy area marked with a sign, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is gradually constrained, and you remove that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then he gently lifts his hand and examines the area, and if you notice any bones exposed, along with the quantity of grit or stones, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that position firmly, use another instrument from those nearby, or one cooled down, as long as it's visible to the bone, which I have already mentioned.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then apply pressure on the burned area at the border, and leave it on the inner part until the skin's barrier is destroyed by the heat.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the area with a four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens, the better the arm gets, so it is better and more youthful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that some parts of the bone should be cauterized and the cautery should be held until a part of the bone's spirit is dried up.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then remove the part that is attached to the bone, and clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that the cautery should be applied to the back, first strengthening the bone with a powerful tool, and this is the form of the small knife used for lancing:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that area, vapours from the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not have sight of these two types of cautery in all cases, but only in some men according to the way of fear; and let this be enough for me: health is best when it is present, as we have witnessed in the other members, and especially when the head of the patient is naturally hot.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that comes first is the safest and best for me; and from that and in that work, health comes.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and persistent pain occurs throughout the head and these symptoms prolong in the patient's suffering, it is customary to use various remedies such as blades, splints, poultices, emplasters, salves, leeches, and dogs, and even more, but especially if a cautery has already been performed that does not address the root cause of the malady. Consider this: if the head of the patient's illness is of a strong and inherent nature, and there is no severe or obvious external injury, then such cauterization with another cautery should be left to one side for the time being.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that part of the head where the bone is cracked using an internal cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and expose the amount we have found, then cauterize that with an internal cautery at the rear part of the head in the area known as the "vat" – it is the location where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand there, do not expose the bone, for the malady finds great pain through it, unlike all other burns on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, because you know that the cautery which treats the horns of the head and the occipital region is a more subtle cautery than the one applied to the middle part of the head; this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capital chapters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe headache occurs at the temple or inside the head, and pain is spread throughout the body, it is treated with medications that clarify the head, and other remedies as mentioned in the treatment of illnesses; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either with sharp, burning medicines or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Make use of cauterizing medicines or burning ointments, take a hot compress and cut open the affected area on both sides of its ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then, with a lance, cut into the site of pain in the temple, deeply enough to reach the bone, but not to expose it.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then tighten it with a bandage after applying a cold compress, leaving it for three hours; afterwards, remove the compress and place the affected area in hot water for two or three days, then apply a new bandage to the cooled site.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a salve to that area until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you choose to do this, follow the instructions I have written in the two treatises on burning medicines that I have mentioned above.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Apply the cautery according to this manner: take a hot iron whose shape is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply pressure over the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the skin from blistering—and slowly turn the hot iron at a gentle pace.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that clings to the specific part due to the heat of the iron is such that it covers most of it, raise your hand so that the artery beneath does not adhere, preventing any flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the area with salt water and place a dressing over it, leaving it for three days. Apply a lot of ointment around the wound until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, burn the edge of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this newly formed injury.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient injuries.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an ancient injury as we have discussed in the previous section on the treatment of various ailments, and if the treatment is not effective, and the pain persists due to a lack of light (or proper care), then ignite the cautery knife while it is still sharp, focusing on the area of greatest pain along its length. Rest your hand for a moment and press down as you make the incision to reach the underlying artery.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be vigilant regarding the continuation of the mandible, which is severely damaged due to lack of chewing, and ensure that the wound is not infected, and the nerves which are affected, do not have spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the prevention and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is compromised, as in the case of its occlusion, there is fear, especially for him who does not understand what causes it and lacks study and patience; thus, delay the operation upon it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And now come to the remembrance of the rules for dealing with the flow of blood from an artery, as it happens, according to their manner, in their place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this ailment does not respond to the cautery and you judge the patient's condition tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you find it necessary, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery constriction using a two-pronged cautery, this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery. This is known as a "puncta," and its shape is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the cautery close to the heat source, and rotate it around the entire ear, or in the form of a circle over whichever part is painful.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Use the cautery on the edge of the ear pain, little by little, until you have relieved the area without causing any harm.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with these points is done on the entire ear and some remain, then treat the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of tortuous (or twisted) parts.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuousness which is cured and the cauterization, in this case, refer to the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoiding cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of tortuousness with pulling and snapping and groaning, and you do not confirm your cure, then know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you pierce the auricle, second, you make a small cut on their temple, and third, you treat the union of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery to the opposite side of the affected part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is as follows: cauterize that part with a cautery instrument directly on the tip of the ear, and another at the temple, whose length corresponds to the length of the finger, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the skin is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the cutting tool, the shape of which is placed on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and its treatment does not include what we have mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all the corners of their head; second, on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and third, on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more deferred; and then its treatment is as you process.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	About the cauterization of a hernia made with flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient at the beginning small doses of grains and pills, the servants will gradually increase them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then completely shave the patient's head, and place on their wound the plaster described in the treatment of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And do this at certain intervals, for that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the methods I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if they prove beneficial for him, otherwise make three cauterizations on the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, hold the thick part of the finger, and then carefully apply the cautery according to the procedure.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you can add more assistance and the patient tolerates it, then make the cautery on the middle part; but if you need even more help, cauterize that over the two joints.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Carefully tend to the inside so that it heals; and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the procedure for relieving parasites and softening throughout the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Now that you have understood the procedure for the softening of the head in accordance with what we have said; then carefully shave the patient's head, and apply cautery to it at the middle part, and cauterize all the joints of the head, and cauterize over the rear part of it, and make three cauteries over the spinal columns of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much cold and the pain persists, while the disease is strong, cauterize with four cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, then apply cautery until the intense pain subsides, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then attend to it until it is healed, and this cauterization should be with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy is not cauterized, but if it is due to phlegm, then cauterization is indicated.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is important to purify the brain of the patient at the beginning, when you have used fire and other remedies as described in our previous discussion, where the disease is severe and resistant to medical treatments.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer warm and soothing drinks to the servant who purifies them, for several days, as a benefit of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over each corner of the head where it has been cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient's condition is severe and they are tolerant, then cauterize with cauteries as mentioned, having a paralytic and soothing effect on the body over the spinal columns of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply gentle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are corrupted corrupt humors and gross phlegm, cauterize them with the cauterizes that we have mentioned in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholia is an excess that declines to melancholia, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him something that purifies his mind from it according to what has been preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, then apply a moderate torture to him on the circle, and then rest it in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel relieved, and be held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be done before shearing sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that above the fire for a measured warm temperature, which tells her to suffer more when it is in place.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take that in the middle part of his head in a circular manner, and wash it until it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient every day for a week, following his diet until he is cured; or if you wish, cauterize those making small points as best as possible, holding your hand over it equally: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain to equal effect.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that moistened cloth on the border or in the folds of a grey goose.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of water retention in the legs.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the onset of water retention in the legs is recognized by the signs I have mentioned in the previous section, it begins and should be treated by giving the patient a drink that purges the head, and care should be taken of all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And he should take baths with specific herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And he should command the patient to wash their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and if water retention begins in two legs, he should cauterize with two irons over both temples, or with one iron on one side of the head if the onset is in one leg.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left by the cord; and the cauterizes should be on that length in the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to knowledge that is in extraction of arteries and amputation of those, and caution against blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes cautery is performed on the neck where two bones are joined with two cauterizes, thereby producing healing.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	**On the cauterization of ancient tears.**
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are frequent and through veins and arteries which appear in the external part of the head, and it is observed that there is an excess of fluid causing muscle weakness, then cauterize that place with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water in the eyes, and apply a cautery in the middle part of the head and two cauteries below the temples, and two cauteries below the bones of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize that on all parts of the eye's coat over the edge of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	**On the Cauterization of Nasal Discharge:**
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat someone with the condition we have described in the previous section and your treatment does not prove effective, then prepare a mixture for the patient to drink for three nights; also, shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply the cautery, using a pointed cautery on both eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the fire so as not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cautery with the clavel.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening of the eyelids with a cautery.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with a pointed cautery, like this:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply the cautery to both eyebrows with a small pointed cautery along their entire length, and they will become elongated from the tempora.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the protrusion.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and close up the eye, apply the cautery to the lid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inside out and close up the eye, applying a cautery to it is done in two ways: either as a burning cautery or as a medicinal cautery.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you are using a fire cautery, command the patient to look away from where you will cut their hairs, so that they do not see; and if you must, place your hand over their eyes with a bandage, so that the hairs remain uncut.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are clean and dried, place the patient's head in a favorable position, and then pay attention to the eyelids of the affected eye, signaling it according to the shape of a dead leaf, and this is the beginning of the sign close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a cold compress or a wet cloth over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery, shaping it as required.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize along the marked figure, gradually, in several passes, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the successful treatment is that you see the eyelid of the eye contract and the hairs stand up at the site of the puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then remove it gradually until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery on that part just as you had done originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position, sealed, and the hair does not reappear.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicinal fire is that you command the patient to pull out the hair until it is prolonged and sealed, and then make a paper-like bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then apply soap known for its healing properties mixed with warm water, forming a paste like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the affected joint or both; leave the moistened wound covered in white honey and keep the patient's head elevated.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And now I will explain this further regarding the medicine; apply a small amount and do not be afraid if the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for stinging is like fire in it.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as you continue to observe the patient and see that the medicine's stinging subsides, stop administering it and apply a cold compress to the affected area; then consider how many times the eyelid has been lifted—just as it is washed—due to either burning or cutting, as is appropriate. And if it does not return to the application of the medicine on the spot where the medicine was initially placed, do not be concerned, for your operation will succeed and the wound will contract.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over it, until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and treat that with a definite ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to pay close attention that no part of the medicine falls from the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days due to any cause from the hairs in the eye, then repeat your medicine on that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and leave it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the method of making a cupping glass.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness, and therefore your compression should be made according to that.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let the way of treatment not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of fistulas that are in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method we have described in the sections on illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then know that you cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place a minister's head between their thighs in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then apply some hot compress or a cloth dipped in honey over the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, which is shaped as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, resembling a cane or a coil of a spring, from one end where the cautery is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you look, it penetrates into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish to come out this way, do so with caution.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, he who is cautious is better at the work itself.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is open, press it so that it heals and dries out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place the hot cautery over it, and with your hand protect the skin from the cautery at the root of the nose, so that neither your hand or the patient is disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the gray parts of the nose and burn that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, if at the beginning of the cautery it penetrates into the bone, well done; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it thus for three days, then apply a compress with a dry ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it is still not healed, then apply the sharp, corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and treated as appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	There is another way to perform a fistula cautery that some first described: enter the location of the fistula and dry it, then apply pressure to the small crack from which it emerges. You make a seal over the area with as much care as possible, preventing any further harm to the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate into the wound; cover the wound of the patient with an albumen or water, because the lead will adhere to the site of the fistula and heal it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula heals with what we have mentioned about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a drain from the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of the Hernia Opening**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequent accidents cause openings in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those openings as we have mentioned in the divisions and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a small knife as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the depth of the opening should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place the bandage carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that moist wound until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of the uvula, or in the palate or around the teeth, an abscess forms and it bursts, and it becomes chronic, and a fistula opens up, and you treat it but do not give proper care, then you should light a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and insert that burning cautery into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand guide the burning instrument to the depth of the fistula, doing this once or twice; and afterward, apply the treatments we have mentioned for healing until it is cured.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and host the corrupt bone as will be discussed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX.**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are decayed, and these conditions are treated with medications rather than surgery, then the doctor should place the patient's head in a certain position, and shape the cautery so that it can be inserted between the tooth and the gum, where the fiery tip of the ignited cautery will penetrate gently without causing great pain to the patient.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and do this for an hour, afterward stop it; for the decayed tooth will be held in place, the softened gums will be tightened, and the corrupted moisture will be dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is a frost or vermin in it, and the cure does not come from medicine, then cautery should be performed on that part in two ways: either with cow dung cautery or fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow dung is to take cow dung and boil it in a ferrule, then take hold of it and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth, and then immerse that in boiling cow dung, and place it over the painful tooth until it is numbed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse a cloth or bandage in hot water, place it on the painful tooth, and hold it there until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization is only indicated for burns or wounds, and it should be applied with care to avoid any harshness or the heat not reaching the wound's opening.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as required, place it on the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that, by pressing the cautery, the patient opens their mouth well and holds it for an hour, then gently remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have prepared it according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of extrophules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophules are filled with phlegm and humors that are resistant to digestion by medications, and you need to force their discharge, then apply the cautery precisely following its shape, having two open ends so that the smoke from the cautery reaches both of them. Once one end has been treated, move the burning instrument to another area as needed until the extrophule is emptied.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the extrophule is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and wrap it tightly for three days, placing a clean dressing over it until the burned area has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that medicinal ointment and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the catheter or cautery for such use is conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of wounds and the constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled by a sudden cold, it is necessary to evacuate that illness at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place with a hot iron in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to burn the pleura with the hot iron nor to inflame the patient's chest unless a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply a cautery to it or another cautery as needed on the joint of the neck at the last spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of it is like a nail according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of what has been mentioned above until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for lung maladies and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung maladies are due to moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old condition, then cauterize with two cauteries on the furcula in the places where the lungs are cracked and weak; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot between the two mamillae; and use the cautery like a nail according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization with pointed cauteries should be similar to the cautery used in the puncturing of auricles.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make punctures within these; then take care to clean that area thoroughly before it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cauteries should have three edges for cauterization, as follows: once you can make three cauterizations in this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of the skin, which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return on its own, you must reduce the dislocation while it still allows for return, and then gently shift the malposition back to its place, either on the patient's back or side. Elevate the limb that was affected, starting from the joint inside the skin towards the top with your left hand if the dislocation occurred inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two tips; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply the cautery to the constricted area where one enters the other, and the form of cauterization will appear with the use of three cautery tips.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so it becomes subtle according to the quantity of attempt; this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this count and for these cauterizations are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the whole cautery in salt water, and do what you can to make the patient tranquil, and do not move the limb for any length of time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then this should be done, cauterizing the muscle with a heated cautery clamp or with a pointed metal cautery, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is inflammation in the stomach and moisture accumulates within that part of its structure, and if you continue with treatment methods without considering, soon you will see that the illness will spread to the patient's back, extending their muscles and organs, and it should be cauterized with three cauterization techniques: leave a small part of the foot with a single cautery claw-like instrument, and use two cauteries on each side of the back cost, forming a triangular cautery shape; stretch between those that are not properly adjusted to prevent gangrene.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in such a way that this cautery does not frighten the patient: you know how much point you want to apply, and then cauterize that point; and take care of that with treatment as long as healing has not occurred.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Capitol XXVII.**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein occurs due to coldness, humidity, or excessive wind, and it deviates from its normal course by causing excessive discharge, the illness is treated as we have said, not by compressing it; then, you should raise the affected part of the body, and apply three cauterizations according to this form, with this amount of heat over the vein below the hip, which brings about the supine position in men.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries themselves should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not be afraid of the cautery's heat.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of moisture adhering to the quantity of the specific nature of the cloth is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the illness stands on the patient's feet; or if it is not standing, then let them sit, who have already extended their things and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn too much with the cautery, and focus the gaze of all your body so that the whole body is inflamed and penetrates within the intestines, because here the chain is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is within the flesh or on the sheath of the tendon, if it is within the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on a severe appearance and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is on the sheath of the tendon, because the pain is severe and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is in the correct position; then identify the location of the hernia with your hand; and apply the pointed cautery, which resembles a rag, whose shape was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire wound is closed, so that it heals properly.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use any other cautery than those described in the art of medicine, and especially those that cause discomfort, as you have learned; but for this operation, try it on yourself a few times first, but always keep safety in mind, which is best.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cauterization techniques for pleurisy, as described in this manner, involve taking the long, thin edge of an aristological knife, which is found to be sharp, and making a point on one end, of the appropriate thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse them in oil and heat them over the fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizes below, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard begins, and two cauterizes inclining between the fifth rib and the lung, slightly inclined towards the rear parts; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and one over the stomach, and three cauteries in the rear parts; and a cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizes on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area in use.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of other ancient practices that involve the use of hot iron cauteries, like a ray and fire, to burn those areas, placing them in the space between the ribs, as long as it helps to heal that condition and create a healthy wound, as we have said about the cautery on the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	One should not be afraid of using cautery in this puncture, as it often happens in the infected area where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX. (Note: This appears to be an identifier rather than text to be translated.)
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On cauterization of the melanin (or possibly referring to a specific condition affecting pigment).
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the bowels with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your cure, use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one being to make three or four punctures along the length of the bowel according to the shape of the cauterization marks on the foot.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of cauterization is the manner we have said regarding foot cauterization in general.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand with the cautery; the illness should be on its back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you light the cautery having two directions, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the displacement of muscles, and raise the cord which is in the correct position of the bowel where the pain lies on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, by which you raise the leg according to the length of the body, be such that cauterization is done according to the extent of the wound.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then carefully insert two hot instruments, speaking softly, into the space where they penetrate the leg from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterizers; and thus four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then dress the cauterizations so that they do not fall off for several days, as it is more comfortable than other previous causes of treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but directly to the affected part.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating dropsy using the methods described in its division, and if your treatment does not confer relief, then apply four cauterizations around the affected area, as well as a cautery on the abdomen, another on the thigh, another on the shin, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery directly on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause prolonged pain.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the disease of treatment with cautery alone, but add two intentions to it, and it will be celebrated with aid for healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery that is used to cauterize the abdomen should be according to the shape of it, and it is that which is used to cauterize the back is olive-shaped, as is previously mentioned regarding its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter XXXII**
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	**On the Cauterization of Feet and Thighs**
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in cold water and become filled with water, cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, between the big toe and the little finger, without pressing too hard; then lift your hand, but do not return it completely, for the cold water will seep out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cautery according to this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs, and on each cut, apply a hot cautery at the end of a cutting instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on each side, leaving one at the pain and another at the middle point of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter XXXIII** (Note: The exact content of this chapter cannot be inferred without additional context from the treatise, but the capitalization and structure suggest a continuation of medical instructions or theories.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts.** (This heading suggests a section detailing medical procedures for conditions affecting the abdominal area, including the use of cautery.)
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to cold and humidity that dissolves the vitals, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, present in the stomach and intestines, which is cured through healing methods and does not confer relief, sometimes the patient endures severe pains from the exposure of these vital virtues, then cauterize that area with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtile circuit, with a subtle claw cautery; also cauterize over the heat on a large stone or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity overflows and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure from youth of which one does not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in a natural state, old hemorrhoids, caused by thick humors or corrupted by moisture, are treated with the methods mentioned in the previous section and do not respond to conventional treatment, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the abscesses located at the small of the back and a small triangular one, and cauterize them on the navel from both sides for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned earlier; also cauterize on the tongue with one cautery, and another cautery on the liver with a nail-like cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove hernias, you apply the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert that ignited instrument into the hernia you have removed, and maintain your hand over the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply medicine to them with hot compresses until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so later in the process.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then healing comes through cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old, corrupt with bad humors and impurity, it is most appropriate to begin by attempting a gentle treatment, and then gradually increase the depth of the attempt as recommended.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a flame.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then apply that ignited cautery to this fistula, according to the depth of the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be careful of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the matter that caused it has been removed, and it remains closed for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the foreign bodies are not removed from the body, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting it, or falling into those causes of which there will be recollection at its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize them using a cautery on each ulcer, starting with the one that causes the most pain.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should cauterize it a second time, slightly later, so that there will be three cauterizations in sequence, and thus the healing process will be faster.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease does not retain urine, then cauterize that part where pus has formed, starting from below the urethra, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of pain; cauterize with a cautery at the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be struck according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The number xxxix indicates the chapter number, not that it is part of the translation.)
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When fever and moisture come, it prevents conception, corrupts the patient's menstruation, delays their arousal, and causes pain upon their arrival, so the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the vesica; or with a cautery on the spot below the back, or with two cauteries, and it should be a clavi-cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus infiltrates the space around the ankle and causes its displacement, and this becomes a recurring issue, a sign of it is that the affected area appears longer than the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation should be immobilized with a suitable boot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular with the cautery as if you were testing the circumference of the opening, so that the hernia falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the cautery described above is also used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then apply three large olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the amount of inflammation in all the wound; and be careful that it is clean.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII (42)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower extremities due to friction and moisture, the malady is treated with the water we have mentioned and should not be confused, for it is an ancient remedy. You should then remove the malady from the thick humors using foul or artificial pills or something similar; and apply a cautery to that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery on that area follows two ways: either a cautery with medicinal substances that burn, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area across the gap in the thigh with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make them go deeply enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be in accordance with the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some times the cautery may be applied to the middle part of the anus for there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form proceeds in the cauterization of the anus displacement, one that is circular and burns away the inflammation of all the tissue.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in the rectum when pain is fixed to the anus and not spread into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is spread into the thigh, then cauterize that as two cauteries on the thigh over the place where the malady, which causes pain, is located; and one cautery on the shin four times, slightly towards the inner part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is made with a knife, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the tissue.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the disease spreads that the pain is in the foot itself, then cauterize the area where you see it with three or four or more points if need be for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the disease perceives pain remaining in the side, then cauterize the area with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not end up with the cautery on nerves or great injury, and thereby do harm to the patient or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those whom we cauterize on the ankle and end with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated within that it achieved the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then there is a strong solution of acid in the stomach, and this brings about death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously apply cautery to each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And certain scholars speak of the method of using a hot iron for cauterization, as follows: make it in the shape of a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its point should be as sharp as a date palm bone or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, make another third; and as for the space between them, let it be the width of a night's rest; and those circles should have two parts; and the length of those lines should be one or two nights, and properly decorate the edges of the iron on the circles; this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and once it stops burning, place it on the affected part of the patient, the illness laid upon their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so he cauterizes that part with three round cauterizers at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then he should rest for three days; apply a poultice to that part and keep the wound open for several days, and take care of it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my sons, we have used little of this type of cautery out of fear of its appearance, and because few have found those that regard it favorably.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Apply the best cauterizers to him who suffers from them, and find a way to relieve that place of his suffering.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Instead of cauterization, use medicines that you make into two circles with a perforated armature made of iron in which the keyhole is situated; their thickness and depth should be equal to two nuts or such.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it can accommodate the thickness of the finger; then place cushions on both sides and ensure they support each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then apply pressure over the part where the patient feels pain on their side, and take your hand off the water; form it into two circles, and the quality of that should be like fire, gradually applying it for an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and squeezing - as if by fire - until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all over the affected area using clean water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then bind it up for three days and apply pressure to the wound until the burning of the adhesion subsides, and leave it like that for some days, and it will heal without scar tissue; this is the best treatment for young people.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, place him in a position that retains water as it is done with the hydrotherapy treatment.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no extinction of both in turn, cut them and place them in a new mold from which the opening has been perforated, according to the quantity that goes inside.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And leave the bottom of the mold with another layer of hot alkali and live water, then take those two with your hand, compress them well, and let the hot water from the alkali-water mixture flow down into the opening left in the mold.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then carefully adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other renewable alkali, so that it becomes a strong acid, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the other members, as the operation uses fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among these medicines are some that use cauterization with a wide instrument, both quickly and gently, and cause no pain, so they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	He here recounts a story of an ancient man who performed an operation and cure for the pain of water (possibly hydrocele) and sciatica, and greatly praised that method, saying it requires no other treatment, and indeed, strengthens the patient so much that after recomposing himself in a bath, he is completely cured from that time forward.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that near a certain vein, if it is not obstructed by a vein, take a fresh fig (possibly a fig leaf) and twist it; tie it tightly to the water or part where the pain is, whether in the thigh, or leg, or foot, and bind.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for as long as the illness requires adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in water, and when the body of the patient is warmed, insert that into the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use cautery with these remedies unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the narrow vein of a goat is cauterized, it becomes beneficial; and the cautery should be applied to them in this manner: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dry goat's vein and apply it to the fire until it is charred; then place it on top of the wool and leave it until it hardens.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears in the water and the pain is relieved.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this type of cautery is called a "cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times, pain in the back is caused by various factors, such as a fall or blow, or due to excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, through the infusion of foreign, irritant material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not apply to any other type but this specific one caused by the infusion of irritant material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, prepare pills that resemble them and apply them over the part where the pain is located in three lines according to its extent, using cautery on each line as much as needed, depending on the quantity of the malady's tolerance and the strength of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using the median claw according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization begins with jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This malady often appears in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that their joints become stiff in the evening, causing elevation and limited movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last spine of the back and the nodes of it which already begin to rise above the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to stop it, you cauterize it with a rounded cautery in this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over all parts of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then carefully tend to the area as it heals, as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that a cautery is not applied to a swelling caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated by applying heat and the pain does not subside, then cautery is used.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize the proper drainage in the joint of the foot using various cautery tools.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take an olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints and this persists, then cauterize each toe with three or four of these olive-shaped cauteries.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, just enough to target the specific point.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain radiates to both the toe and the foot, then administer the cauteries as we have discussed in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the joints, it is called gout, then make points around the affected joints as they are affected, on these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these joints, make points around the joint circuit on each side and also on the thumb of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can spread to other joints or muscles, apply cautery to various parts of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the disease without proper treatment and reception of medicines; for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is removed through this cautery, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the chapter number, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of breaks.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the joints and exposes the intestines before the hernia, this is how it should begin: at once, you must order the patient to stop eating on that day and use gentle means so that the gap closes from their stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then support the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their breath within themselves, so that no gap or hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the intestines to their place, and carefully try to close the rupture on the bone of the pelvis, marking the edge of which is similar to the shape of a circle in the opening parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery whose form is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which there is much heat and swelling.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery properly, and aim it towards the bone of the toe within the middle of the swelling; and repeat that another time if you have not achieved it at first attempt onto the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the condition of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to inflame that hernia through the treatment, lest it lead to death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not perform your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery of children should be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care of the site of the cautery for three days, applying fresh bandages until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for 10 days until the site and the plague are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care to fast him according to the duration of his healing, which strengthens his stomach and prevents the intestine from protruding due to efforts to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is appropriate to lift after approximately 10 days, then give the treatment properly made, and hold that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should also reduce work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with cauterizing the hernia with a red hot iron according to its size, and the fluid that is exuded from it should be like that from a third part of the body; then take care of that as we have said, and do not tighten it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Some have also said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, because it is perceived by trial.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that they use for the width in the flesh above the rupture, and another line on top of it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in other parts of the body is caused by injury or impact and persists for a long time without yielding to treatment with medicines, then it is appropriate to cauterize using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the type of cautery for each member should be according to its size and depth, its nature and condition, the location of the twist and the pain it causes.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually, in those pains, the members are punctured to the member closest to it, so that you get these pointed cauteries until the patient is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	**Chapter XLVII**
De cauterizacio de lepra.	**On the Cauterization of Leprosy**
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes require cautery for severe swelling, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is severe and if that part has been cured by what we have said in the division and not others, or if it does not improve, and be wary of the patient's condition that corruption may spread throughout the body and affect its entire structure. Then cauterize that part on the head with a cautery: first at the middle part of the head, then below it, you can treat the forehead at the end of the hairs; and also on two horns; and one behind, over the nape or serve it.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, with the cautery, apply it slightly so that it creates a slight impression on the bone, and dislocates the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the surface as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize with these cauterizations which we have mentioned at the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and make two cauterizations on each cheekbone, and two cauterizations on both spine bones of the neck, and five cauterizations on the spine bones of the back, and one large cauterization on the spine bones near the coccyx, and one over the coccyx, and two on each ankle, and one on each toe, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and hold firm the skin of their foot; and cauterize on all the joints of both hands and feet, and on every heel of their feet, and on the arches of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be mindful of the nerves that are on the leg, do not disturb those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, cautery is performed with a hot iron on the bone of the thigh, and also on the opening of the stomach, and yet other times on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more precisely you apply cautery, the greater its effectiveness, and also that illness causes no pain when cauterized, as long as they are done correctly; thus, the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take care that the size of the cautery is great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully apply the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stunned or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unsanitized, you cauterize the affected member with cautery according to the severity of the member or the extent of its condition.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the hot cautery should enter into the depth of the flesh slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then take care that the cautery is applied where it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor is cauterized that extends to the hands and feet, and to the spine and veins of the body, which causes pain in the member, and the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not attempt to treat this unless he who is skilled in the anatomy of the body's members and the exit of nerves throughout the whole body moves it.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When hemorrhoids are ancient and do not yield to any of the remedies of medicine, then cauterize them with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord within, provided that the white and red color of the hemorrhoid be preserved, and its color changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a cure from flour of barley and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of arnugrosa, either pigeon droppings or cow manure, each in equal parts, and lay it as a poultice over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of cracks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to develop and you want to extract it, cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery as it is revolved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this happen a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more important that it be cauterized around the circumference of the affected area in a circular manner as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 5.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of hernias.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a hernia takes too long to heal, it may be due to excess fluid, the patient's poor health, old age, lack of strength, or time; and if you want to hasten the healing of the hernia, cauterize around its edge with small pointed instruments; then apply pressure to ensure it is compacted.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you choose to perform the cauterization of the hernia, then ignite the cautery whose form is thus: and place it at the middle point of the hernia until the thread penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied at that point which is deepest, so that the body of the arm is lifted; and then take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a mobile corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place where cauterization with fire is necessary, you should use hot iron needles, small and large as appropriate for the location where corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it completely until you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then bind it for three days, and apply oil mixed with ashes repeatedly over the cauterized places until all scaling is completely eradicated and all corruption gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with a poultice of hot, moist meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If the flesh is fresh and not corrupt after three days, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some medicines several times a day, for those are half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is more suitable for removing the leukocyte immediately.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already mentioned the treatment of it with acute medicine in the incision, and therefore take that when you find him inclined to gangrene.
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter III**
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Conditions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Flakes of hardened material should be removed from the parts surrounding the foot affected by the malady called gout, a severe, penetrating condition that attacks the foot; and treatments for these are in two manners, either with hot cautery or with cold cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization with fire involves igniting the hot cautery tool resembling a whip's tail, made of iron according to the amount of gout it contains in every part, and should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then hold the ignited cautery over the gout, and carefully rotate your hand with the cautery around the gout until it reaches the depth of the gout.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it starts to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply that patch made from wild mallows mixed with salt to it, and leave the patch on for one night, so that it removes the root of the gout.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a healing ointment made from natural flesh until it is cured.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not heal and ulcers appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should apply these cauterizations with water, and take a thin reed or iron needle or a penknife, and place it over the joint; then dip the tip of the instrument into some water, hold your hand, and press down firmly until the entire area is compressed, and repeatedly move the edge of the instrument along the joint's edges, until you see the water flow out from under the joint. Wait for the patient to feel the burning of the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, because the heat will have dried up the moisture in the joint.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And also, apply this to all parts of the body where they might be present.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat the abscesses that have been dried up from the joints with ointments made from flesh-generated medicines.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter a tremor caused by friction on the nerves or due to fever from a contaminating cause, or for other similar reasons, it is necessary that you cauterize those affected areas with four cauteries or three over the spines of the back, between each spine placing one cautery; also cauterize the foot, and the stomach with olive cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient ceases, and hastens the healing of the contaminated illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of sudden accidents throughout the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body expels white sores, and pustules are formed from corrupt solid matter; therefore, at the beginning of the appearance, cauterize with a subtle cautery or a heated iron, the tip of which is extended over the fistula; or cut with a long needle; or cauterize with a lenticular.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not swollen, and excess fluid is drained, making them healthy again.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it may be necessary to perform a flebotomy for this.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of a flux of blood from an accidental wound by an arc incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Excessive bleeding from an incision should be controlled using bandages or the application of pressure, especially when dealing with the start of an abscess or a cauterization on a body part, and it appears similar, but it is difficult to contain.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So if this happens to anyone, you must apply your hand over the wound of the incision, and hold it there until the flow of blood has stopped, ensuring that no further bleeding occurs.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And in addition, apply hot olive oil cauterizing irons, both small and large, by placing many of them over the fires until they are heated through.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from them, according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, either a small or large iron, and apply it swiftly over the vein that you have cleaned with the previous method, cauterizing it until the blood flow is stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the wound when you remove your hand and pull out the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared over the fire, and do not stop doing this until the bleeding stops.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to damage the nerves here, which could lead to further complications for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to constrict the flow, especially if the artery is large. There are four ways to do this: either with cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction, where the ends of the vessel are damaged and the bleeding restricted; or by binding or ligature for a strong closure, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to constrict the flow; and these should be placed on a cushion or pad at the cost of the patient.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a proper restriction of it with bandages or by reason of burning causes and similar ones, does not relieve but aggravates.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for anyone and not in the presence of a doctor or medicine, open at the pause indicated on the affected area of the vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood flow is stopped from the sovereign cause of the plague, and regarding the hardness, do not hesitate; and on the hardness, apply hot water with a great chill until the veins are frozen and thickened; and then consider what cautery or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second step.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incision and perforation, and blisters, and phlebotomy, and sores, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter, we have discussed all manner of illness where cauterization with fire is appropriate and medicinal combustion effective, along with their occasions and causes, and the tools necessary for such cautery in accordance with the shape of the wound; I have arranged the chapters ascending from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, we shall proceed in this order, so that anyone desiring it may find relief, as needed.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin, take note that this chapter is devoted to the treatment of fear, which is discussed in detail in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is of great importance, be aware that in the operation discussed in this chapter, which involves severe bleeding due to the cautery, life-saving measures such as the application of sanative herbs, the draining of pus, the extraction of arrows, or incisions into abscesses must be performed with extreme caution.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And among all these symptoms are fear and trembling, and in many of them death follows.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall on you, for sometimes you may be deceived by the symptoms of illnesses and act as if they are not present.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is from them that you will learn about their illness, and you should not dismiss it as death, for the urgency of what they find in their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and the severity of the illness itself means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is from these that you gain knowledge and understanding, telling yourself to hope for health, and their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you with such a manner; let your caution be greater than your trust and your greed; and do not presume any cause for it, but only consider certain knowledge that verifies what should happen to you, and from which admirable success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your ailments the prognosis and indication of that which is turned to health, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have organized this distinguished chapter into sections as indicated in the preceding chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head to that of the feet, so that it may assist you in anything you inquire about and need regarding these matters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness often manifests in children during teething, and when the blackness enters the child's head, it causes pain.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes certain conditions should be observed for an underlying cause that is not apparent.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This disease may also be seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed the same effect on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that in a child whose head was filled with water, the head of him was always thus swollen so much that he could not raise himself because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the flesh and bone or is added beneath the bones on the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that case if the moisture is between the flesh and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its width, and the length of the fissure should be enough to let the moisture escape, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, when the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess becomes larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity leaves the bone, it is a sign that you must open the eye sockets completely and the water is squeezed out when you press that part of the dry skin inside and it is not something you should hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make an opening in the middle part of the head as three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract the incision completely to remove all humidity; tighten the cracks with drapes and plasters; drill into the affected area from above using a saw and oil within five days, and then remove the lint and cure the wound with poultices and ointment, while holding the head in an equal position; and feed the patient dry bread with little humidity until the member is healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling of water, and do it as best as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and heals the patient through that flow of blood during the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries which are close to the auricles, called hilisseys.
Capitol segon.	**Second Chapter.**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an acute or severe pain in the ears or feet, and it is old, do not apply any treatment with medications, but rather the last cure for this is to incise those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus you cover when you want to incise where the disease has formed its head, and then rub the area with coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and tighten the collar of the disease with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each over the locations which are closest to the auricles, and they remain hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then you should cut across the artery with a knife, and incise each one along the direction of the fracture caused by the incision reaching into the bone, and this according to the extent of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the knife between the artery and cut it at the incisions made from above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when a vein is incised, the blood is immediately released from the pulsating exit, which constantly jumps out.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you get from the wound is a quantity of one drop, and strong leach cannot extract more or less from it, and all this depends on the extent of the patient's malady and the depth of the arrow in their body.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and if you find any cause of infection on the bone, then incise it carefully to prevent the spread of gangrene.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migraines occur due to seasonal humidity and the quality of tears in the temples, or sudden old age that resembles these, and it is not relieved by conventional medical treatments, then we resort to extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is to target the ailments that reside in the temples; and understand the visible artery in the temple where it is shown by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its severity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the illness with a cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you see the artery manifestly appear.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge that has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the lock with ease as you reach the arrowhead; and you open it and extract the inner part superior to the others while you remove that of the lock and discover that of the tunic which is left behind from every attempt.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you wrap it around the end of the finger and cut it with a single strike according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened or contracted, and thus it will not bleed excessively, for if it is not cut, no blood will flow from it entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then, empty the vein of blood within three beats.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and induce blood flow from it.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments, and do this at that time or another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it while they are still incised, and hold in place that precise work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a condition of heat; for cauterization is for those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the bones that have moved from their place, and they should be placed over it properly prepared, and treat with dry medicines to make the flesh and blood flow within until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time bleeding from the bone occurs, then you should restrict that blood flow, or cauterize, or fill the place of the joint, and strengthen your hand over it until the bleeding is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those symptoms is not apparent, then hold the affected area until the swelling subsides, and apply cold water with vigorous friction until the pain eases, and treat it according to need.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more lightly extracted from archery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have felt both places with your hand, and applying some heat, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of the vein can be elongated, as it is not strengthened by all this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both edges is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better to have just one edge sharp, as if both are very sharp, they can cut the flesh too quickly when pressed against each other.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is retained there, and the flesh is separated slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than any other and should be done gently.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two bones should be as wide as the thickness of that one.
Capitol quart.	Final stage.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic chest pain in the legs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the pain is acute and acidic, affecting those veins just above the surface of the skin on the head, and no medical cause can be identified, the patient's face may become discolored and they may feel a throbbing in their forehead as if it were crawling with ants. Their legs are exhausted, damp, and their skin feels rough due to the intensity of the tears. The old remedies for this condition in such procedures are ineffective, and I will mention that treatment as superficial.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which is on their forehead, and then incise three cuts equally distant along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut is two parts: one cut is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are at the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be mindful of the beginning of the cuts which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each cut is three parts, adjust accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife between the two sharp ends, which is the shape of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the skull, which lies over the bone, and then make this cut from the first incision into the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strike with this knife and insert another instrument called a scalpel into the first incision; one side of it is sharp and the other is not.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the bone, and press it deeply into the gap between the bones, and use it to reach all vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appear of the cord, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the flow of blood becomes equal, squeeze the areas of the frozen veins of the sanction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a warm compress of wool, soaked in wine and oil, and let it not cause any burns with caution.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, loosen the bandages and administer a large infusion of cold water or herb tea, and then care for it with a paste of basilicon and rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	It appears that there might be a missing or incomplete sentence here. The term "Capitol" likely refers to the Capitoline Hill, an ancient site in Rome, but without context, it's challenging to provide a precise translation. If this is part of a medical treatise, it could refer to a specific location for treatment or a general conclusion. For a more accurate translation, additional text would be beneficial.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding through catharsis and the descent of fluids from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute bleeding continues and the wounds of the patient's eyes become weakened and their eyelids ulcerated along with the hairs from their sockets, and in the region of the head there is intense pain leading to subsequent detachment, then it becomes clear through these accidents that the matter and catharsis do not come from veins outside but from those within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is as follows: command the patient to tilt their head, and then make an incision in that middle part of the forehead, a little towards the left (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and with your hand remove the blood from the temples which are better drained after chewing). While keeping the bone exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or cloth and then fill between the two edges of the incision with very clean gauze or cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply to them a dust of herbs mixed in wine and oil, so that they do not catch a foul infection.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you treat it and see that the infection has decreased, then rub the bone within that starts in the fresh flesh, and apply a remedy of drying agents, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, make a paste from them, and administer this to these wounds, both on raw flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what attacks the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that attacks the ears is one of four kinds: it may be a hard mineral or something similar to a stone, such as iron or lead, or it may be from plants like chickpeas or fava beans, or fluid-related, such as water and wine mixed together, or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a cat or other similar cause affects the ear, and the ear is pained, it turns towards the sun, and if the pain occurs, it distills into some cause of foul oil or mucous, then administer the extraction of it, and do make the nose blow in a condition, and oppose the nose to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then apply some pieces of cloth or wool to the course of the ear, and extend the ear away from the sides, for these causes often forget these remedies.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if these remedies do not help, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a gentle epicyclic, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten about the epicyclic, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very subtle instrument with only a slight bend.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of thread and insert the end of the cannula into the canal of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that only the cannula opens.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the small wind with strong attraction, for many times we have seen this.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, take some hot light or some old apparatus with which the tools are heated, hold that at the end of the ray, and then wrap it decently around that part.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten with all the causes we have seen, then you should cut off that which causes abscess or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting is that you begin by cauterizing the infection in the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, then make that cease between your fingers and turn the edge towards the parts from which it originated, and make a small incision at the base of the edge where the disease has been most pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture is of a lunar shape that it reaches the bone, and the bone is dislocated, stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; and immediately with speed apply treatment to the fracture until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the swollen and inflated fats, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not obey to my advice, then take some fine sponge according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the removal of the fallen fat from the auricle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think that the affected area is already moistened by heat, hold it in heavy masses, or extract it with incisions or subtle movements, or through an incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	When the water that enters the ear is the cause of the disease, and the patient experiences sneezing as a result, he should immediately fill his ear with some soft wax or cotton up to a certain length, and then heat it slightly in the fire; the patient then inserts one of these into the opening of the ear and jumps on one foot, pressing it against the other, thus creating a strong suction.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, continue with the treatment until all the water is drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And after all the water is drained out, take some paper or cloth, put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until the heat consumes most of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then insert other needles and do this as many times until all the water is drained out, and stretch that thin tube as it is said of the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body entering that ear, if it is a small thing, it can be pulled out and treated as we have said in the previous section; however, if it is a large object causing an apparent rupture, then perform the extraction with gentle gestures and incisions, and the cause should be given more consideration than all other causes affecting the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms grown in the ear, when you treat that as we have said in the previous section and in the treatment of distills, and do not conform to your care, then you should watch over the ear facing the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of the worms appears here, then perform gentle gestures or incisions to extract them, but if no cause appears, take a thin tube that is wide at one end and narrow at the other, whose shape is like this.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered from the malady; then suck strongly at it and make rapid movements, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey these instructions, then your poultice and closure around the canal should be done with wax as we have said; then administer distills that have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this described in the treatise on distills.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your flow should be from which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or iron, left straight, with a small opening and a flat surface on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is used for what it is in the cavity of the containing canal here, it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the needle and neatly wrap it at its end, and then pour oil into the hollow of the ear, or juice from some herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the tube — that is in the ear —, and then insert the needle into the cotton and press your hand over it until the oil is expelled into the hollow of the ear and the pain feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should be already scorched with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you distil in the ear is not too harsh, for the ear medicines do not endure this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure for ear infections.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children have vents in their parents' bellies that are not pierced, and this happens to some men, an inflammation of the flesh of the ear due to a plague or flesh infection in that area; and this inflammation is sometimes felt in the point of the wound of the ear piercing, which is not aware of sensation, and sometimes it is outside the folds.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the point of the wound, which does not understand sensation, is in the most challenging situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where you can feel the sensation, pull the ear of the patient towards the light and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see an apparent inflammation, open that with a delicate spatula, from which this is the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the ear where the inflammation is localized has one part that is sharp and the other not, and the spatula is two-sided, so it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the operation is for a bone grown within the ear or in the flesh, then use fine scissors and cut with violent ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the operation is on the edge of the ear, then take a fine knife and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have sensed an operation as something that the patient finds easy due to the urgency of the situation, by easing the pressure on them; be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then, place a bandage on the ear according to the amount of space required, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the wound; or take some and pour it into water, sprinkle over it every third day, and use it; if the ear has already formed a crust, then be careful not to ruin the ointment and replace it with other ointment made from wax that is smooth, as long as the infection heals cautiously; and attend to it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a flux of blood occurs, then immerse the exposed or drape in warm water, press upon the wound, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is called distillation in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	It appears that you have provided a heading or a section marker, "Capitol .viii." Without any additional text or context, it's challenging to guess the meaning or provide an accurate translation. If you include the corresponding text, I'd be happy to assist with a translation or interpretation.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the treatment of atrophy that occurs on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atrophy of the eyelids may sometimes be caused by moisture, at other times by dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have those soft tissues or fat removed, and then press upon the areas that have been treated.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If sharp pain flows from a venous wound, then cauterize those wounds with a thin lateral cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is when incisions and deep wounds are returned when there is no cause for their reopening; and when cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	**Chapter IX.**
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Deep-seated and hard-to-remove conditions should be observed in the eyelids of the eyes, which, due to their strength and hardness, are called 'great' or 'severe'.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it involves the addition of thick moisture to the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them consists of considering, when the size is progressing in it from where the eyelid appears and is magnified throughout; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So now let us address that fissure by widening it, and extract it entirely with ease as you evacuate it, and then suspend that one and cut and separate that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not equipped with the beginning of it and only penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then this will not appear due to any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not encounter much trouble as the healing of it restores and covers that.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the enlargement is decreasing within the folds of the eyelid, you must explore the surface inside, raise the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a thread, except as you initially intended, and press it from all sides; if due to some cause the eyelid is elongated, this should not be noticed for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, rinse the wound with salt water; and treat the area with embrocation until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of the inflamed eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Inflammation is caused by the swelling of the eyelid's tunics, most often in children, it aggravates their eyes and leads to their clouding; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather around them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you keep those actions upon their faces all the time, and upon their sleep; and to their eyelids leave the eyebrows moist, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the imminence of a discharge is apparent in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel a discharge within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in some cases of operation, when the patient's head is in a tilted position on the bed, place a drape over them and make it moist, and form it into a circle according to the quantity of pus from all parts, and then place that over that one, and press with your fingers on all sides so that a discharge is added to the middle of the circle, and in the middle of that, apply humidity to the sputum incident on the fissure according to its extent, so that the fissure is not larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place in the poultice a hole completely through which you can reach the pus, for in the most delicate positions, pus is discharged through the fissure according to the form of the white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those sheets which you have wrapped around the parts outside and turn them with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust the fissure, so that the spatula does not enter into the wound and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If the spatula does not appear to your satisfaction at the beginning of the fissure, you may adjust the fissure a little more easily until the process is complete; then remove the sheet as we have said; and then immerse sheets in water and wine and place them over the area and sprinkle those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then some sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to prevent any further humidity from remaining there.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an ulcer occurs at the infected site, apply a poultice until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	**Chapter XI**
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	**On the Modes of Touching the Wound**
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When, in the eyes, growths of unnatural hairs occur and they become hard and old, these lead to pain in the eye, causing persistent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and destruction of the eye, which is known as 'tactinir' (a form of irritation). It is treated in four ways: with a hot cautery; using acute medicines as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; by cutting and stitching (incision and suture); or with tubes (cannas), as discussed earlier.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so, you should position the top of the wound over the eye; then, with your left hand, turn the eyelid towards you, and if it does not open on its own, insert an needle into the part where there is a small opening in the eyelid and push the needle through the hair, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are, and pull the thread out from under the eyelid, turning it toward the light.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then gently open the gap between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with a precise cut of the larger lacrimal canal; then extract the foreign body and place the eyelid back using small cotton or cloth, and press firmly on the eyelid as if it were a sealed bag.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary to consider the shape according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those who have a greater amount of fluid in their eyes will require a deeper incision into the eyelid, depending on the extent to which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then open the channel with the scalpel along both lines that you have indicated, starting from the larger lacrimal canal into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as the diameter of the ruler.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then apply the ongle to one of the angles of the wound, scrape it all over, adjust the stitches with two threads of silk or fine wool, wash the blood, and make the excess of the threads adhere to either side of the eyebrows for some reason, if you wish, but otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then, after three or four days, untie the stitches of the threads inside, and cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the scar of the suture and treat it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of fluid; however, more sutures are better. Therefore, I have told you the old practices of the taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, always be careful with the patient, and it is good practice, and there should not be any fear in this.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to measure it, which is that you draw a figure on the eyelid similar to a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three pins, separating and bringing them together according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If the pins are not available, take a needle with a thread and insert it in the center of the figure, then introduce the other needle close to the major lacrimal, and the second one close to the minor lacrimal, and adjust these threads so they are equal, then with your hand at the same elevation as before, raise the entire eyelid as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures and heal that which is clean.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If after your incision or opening, an abscess occurs, treat it with cauterization and similar techniques.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, when the eyelids are affected and their hairs are changing, then use what we have mentioned about incision; a more artificial suture is done in some places.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To translate the text, I will follow the format provided:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you bend the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have described; then, with art, make two tubes or two thin plates of which the length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width matches the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the ends of any cuts where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add any subtle substance to the excess of the eyelid muscle, and tighten the tubes of any cuts with strong tightness, leaving it for a few days, as the cord will die due to the tightness and be denied blood, and it will fall off once it has healed on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and treat the infection until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is secured, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two cans according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the quantity of length and width no more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of painful, hard skin with an agule in the painful area.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is not natural, hard, rough and painful in the heels, then the operation on them involves taking a subtle needle and pricking at that precise, delicate spot with cedar oil and lion's mane, and then adjusting the extremities of it very gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be about a palm's width.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then take another fine thread, pass it quickly through, and twist the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then hold the patient's head in the small of their back, near the sun, so that your work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the closely-grown hair, using skill, and penetrate it swiftly within the eyelid to extract that from its natural place.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair within it and insert that into the oil, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then with your hand, pull that out until the hair is completely removed from the eyelid along with its natural oil.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is pulled off and the skin is not torn, pull the lint off to the sides where you have placed the bandage, so that it sticks to the wound on top.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when you have the sight of the wound, then you will remove the lint and bandage, open up some parts of the wound, and leave the stitches for two or three days, so that the skin attaches to its place and a good scar forms.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the skin needs to be cut shorter, then take a longer natural hair and raise it up to that point, or leave it until it grows long enough to create some space, and then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that appears on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see the eye becoming clouded, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes, to the right or left, due to poor healing of an ulcer, or a section, or a cautery, and this condition is called opacity, and this clouding occurs either naturally or accidentally, and is caused by the healing of an ulcer, or sections, or cauterization, or similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you break that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it what is between those a piece of cloth from him, and bind them so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must use cure from the causes that dry out, constrict; for if you do this, it will cause the condition to cloud again worse than ever.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use among those causes that soften as fenugreek, and soak in water in which the seeds are boiled and ground, or in vinegar, which is liquidified with any of the oils, and immerse the cloth in that, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with every tool that is not consolidated according to the form that you see at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing other than a correction of the deviation that does not return to the form of the place as you see it at first.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of strabism performed on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This strabism, which is performed on the lower eyelid, is not properly called strabism; it is of either natural or accidental origin.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It may be caused accidentally by plague, or incision, or cautery, or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it through the left tear duct into the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh apart from its sides with the needle and cut with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the eyelid to its original shape if it is suitable; otherwise, take the thread and hold that in the split shape, and with that, turn over the eyelid, and make two slits on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of both slits should form two angles of the incision you have made, which converge, and when they meet, the shape of their angle should be as follows.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then stop the bleeding of the patient, for as much as the wound is deep, this is what makes the eyelid close.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread; and treat those with what we have said about softening medicines and applications of cold until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase or close a gap with stitches or cauterization, then make sure that your incision is flat against the hairs of the eyelid as mentioned before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the application of cold between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discourse on treatment for elevation or reduction, when it is above or below, let the operation flow according to how it has been prepared in terms of elevation, and that can take various forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares devices in various ways that are possible for him to return the form to its natural state, or close to it, and treats that illness according to what suits him from the operation and tools at his best disposition.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in most people, the eyelid appears to be solidified with the white part (sclera), preventing its normal movement and functions, so you must insert your finger between the lid and the sclera, and lift it upwards or extend it using a speculum.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you cut through the adhesion using a thin spatula, which should not be sharp enough to irritate the cornea during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not restore the eyelid's natural openness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should sever that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can be returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then immerse it in salty water, with which you wash; or distill it from the sun, dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a drop of water, place over the eye a woolen cloth soaked in egg white, and apply the third day treatments that consolidate the cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eye and the prominence of the flesh of the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eye is of two manners: either it is nervous, similar to a subtle hard chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when pierced with a needle, is easily separated and the needle does not get stuck in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both spices do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, little by little, covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of smell.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating in the incision of the eye is that the patient fixes their gaze on a small object near, and then opens the eyelids with one hand, raises the upper eyelid with the other, and then carefully bends the corner of the eye towards the nose, extending it away from the socket.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into the corner of the eye with a hair from a horse, or cow, or goat, or similar, gradually bending the tip of the needle and placing it in the middle of the eyelid, penetrating the eyelid with the needle, tying the lid to the thread, extending it towards the edges, and carefully removing the hair from the eyelid which blocks the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you remove the hair from within the eye socket.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then carefully incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small scissors, and expose the flesh of the natural tear duct so that by making this incision, continuous flowing of tears does not occur.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some also use an unguent applied to the sole when it is extended or hardened, as we have said, and then carefully scrape off the hard part with a sharp spatula, which is the form of this treatment.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision is made in the wound, apply a little coarse salt or clean lint and leave it for about a day; then take care of it until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the swelling is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place, then try this type of unguent, which is cured by medicine, and so too is healing achieved when you apply and reapply it in layers.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise it, open the wound of the malady and take a thin slice of sharp iron according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with precision.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If the incision becomes hardened and closed up, and the blood flows into it, then draw out the blood slowly from your side in the wound with a clean instrument, or use a hot iron or salt to open it up again, and keep the wound open for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the operation on it until all that is foreign is removed, otherwise a foul pus will form in the wound, for if you leave it, the abscess will begin to form again until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that wound until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the lachrymal flesh, if it is noticed in a great distress, should be suspended immediately; and incise it from one side, but do not complete the incision so as to prevent the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill the lachrymal secretions from the main tear duct until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On incision of the herniated organs and on what arises from attached flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of certain individuals, there is diseased flesh that protrudes, covering or pressing closely against the pupil, and forcing the eyelids apart, so they are joined together like a batten.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The surgical procedure involves positioning the patient so that their malady is resolved in the lower part of their body; then open the incisions on that area and collect all the necessary tissue with forceps or a basket, and cut the tissue from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful of the wound to avoid complicating your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be the one that incises those or excises the spur we have mentioned in the incision of the toe, or small forceps that are collected with care according to the shape that comes appropriate for this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that tissue is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle over it powder made from a medicinal herb similar to corrosive drugs, and place over it a clean cloth until it is certain that there will be no infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any reason for some inflammation and it is necessary to apply a poultice, and you are afraid of an infection, leave the wound and treat that infection with what proves effective for that infection, and then repeat the operation until it heals, and do as you have done with the affected tissue in this case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should be aware that all cure for this acute pain must be avoided by natural or accidental means, using fire, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member has endured that operation sufficiently.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	**On the Collection of Knowledge in Disease.**
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	**Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are stubborn on disease and resist treatment, causing the illness to persist for many days.**
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	**Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the knowledge in which the disease resides is strong and there is no other malady involved; then you should gather that knowledge.**
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	**And it is that you command the disease to halt its head in the small place, and then suspend those veins with a hook or two, according to your prudence; and let this hook have a subtle and double effect in this manner:**
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	They should be two incisions made gradually in a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then they should be collected those veins with subtle forces, in subtlety, and you should withdraw the blood at the proper time, as long as you see those veins to be filled with humor and are revolved.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to touch the humor at the ends of the knife; and if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, and you are strong in your operation, then only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, you will distill the humor with hot water or vinegar so that its sharpness corrupts what has been extracted from the sap.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to collect all of that in that time, then you should apply a compress to everything that alleviates the patient's pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and the risk of abscess is avoided.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat on them according to the method of treatment until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the way of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of a hernia through the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating a hernia with a cautery or sharp medicine, as it is preceded by the account of its condition and is not healed, then do not attempt to tighten it in him, but instead make incisions over the abscess until its maturity, and extract all the humidity that is in it until the bones are exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then use this tool on it, whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an acute headache, and it is made by cutting into the scalp with a sharp instrument, and the head is rounded in such a way that the puncture is made with a lime or alkaline substance through a subtle punctation (such as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And press it over the corrupted part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and apply gentle pressure with your hand until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This should be done at certain times, and then the place is restored using drying and astringent substances.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh in it and the body has been separated from the sanie (perhaps referring to pus or infection) for 40 days, and it is not renewed, nor does it fester, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not possible to bring the fissure back into its natural shape, you must do so by reducing it according to the following method: and this is how you expose the bone, as per your skilled or acute treatment, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold of it in this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument must first be extended towards the extremity in this way as you repeat it.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over the bone, and it should be the one near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand while pressing so that it penetrates the entire bone, and you will feel the pain as it releases air from within.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you restore the area using astringent medicines that dry out as required.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place have been hardened, the matter that was discharged from outside returns to the inside, so this is more easily treated for the malady.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX**
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	**On the Reduction of Swelling**
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling is prominent and does not yield to gentle pressure or decrease, it is necessary to address the malady, and accordingly, you should continue with treatments such as scarification and suction for a good flow; then apply over the swelling a liniment made of aloe, onions, garlic, and horse collar, and strengthen the poultice over the swelling with a motley powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take sheets of lion's fur, and each sheet is cut into four pieces; and make powder from those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount of swelling present.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply strong pressure to these with a firm, tightly drawn cloth; repeat the suction with scarification; and remove the ventoses, leaving the swelling tightly compressed for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, be sure it is still firmly tied.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then leave the ligature firmly in place for both the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, well, then continue with further treatment using poultices, compression, and suction until healing occurs.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the incision of the prominence of the uvular tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you need to disrupt the uvular tunic, and it is prominent, you should process the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, and by forming a shape like a man, you want to perform an incision, during the operation on him, you insert the needle into the root of the uvula from below, and then insert another needle through which there is a double fold from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the location of the double fold and lift that part of the uvula along the course of the needle, and tighten that tissue.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on the humid wool soaked in egg albumen, and wait until the thread falls off the uvula.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wool with something that will soothe it until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from all parts, a circular bandage is wrapped tightly around the prominent area, and then it is punctured through the thin membrane that reaches the nerve ending of the joint, and the white fluid leaks out, and the joint descends and within a short time.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De curacio de alconati.	**On the Cure for Alconati** (or **On Treating Alconation**)
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This affliction known as alconati is nothing but a healthy condition that is confined to the joint, resembling water flowing down, and it is not [the same as] gout.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The manner of working in this case is that you sever the affliction from its attached seat and turn it to the right, and then take hold of its head with both hands from two different sides and press it inward so that you feel the health returning to the parts left behind, and make it stop descending, and retain the light, and as you see the illness thus, its causes become clear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't come down below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If, however, the descent is not prepared as we have said, then the patient should stop the malady between their thighs, take a delicate needle and make incisions at that point surrounding the pannus, just above the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea on the crown (in the place desired), until the sanie (fluid) is drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once the sanie is drained, you should distill warm water in which honey or fennel and honey mixture has been boiled, and apply it to the affected area.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for other causes as well, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water flowing from the knee.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Having discussed the types of water in division, it is now necessary to declare which to pierce and when, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must understand how to stop the patient's pain between your hands on a pillow and tie their knee so that the water stops flowing.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the patient's knee, if the water is in the left knee; or your right hand, if it is in the right knee.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then take hold with your right hand, if the knee is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the knee is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then hold the tip of the hand near the corner for the thickness of the ray in the white of the eye, close to the lacrimal gland, and with your thumb, gently pull the hand towards you and turn it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then gently insert into the wound's albumen, and feel that the almond has already been reached by sight.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it should be measured the distance from the almond to the pupil with the width of the space that is between the pupil and the end of the blackness, which is the iris; for you will see in that pupil the vision of the eye through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then gently press the almond within the area where there is water, and release it downwards a few times, then observe if the water descends; at that moment, you will know the ailment over which his sight was previously focused, and the almond will enter its iris.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then rest for a moment; if the water has descended, you should pause again before releasing it so that the almond is not thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is stuck and will not come down, you extract the magic with ease, turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt gem in water, then wash the swelling inside with that water; and press out the swelling or stop or cotton soaked in rose oil and egg albumen and apply it to the swelling.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we, and those of our time, no longer rely on such things as egg albumen.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not follow your magic with the instrument of the swelling due to its hardness - for it is one of the men whose swelling is hard, then you must understand that you take the spatula named "alberid" which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore, perforate that joint, do not end your hand on the trail, and make sure you only create a subtle space for the magic to enter.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then I insert the almug as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must prepare the bed for the sick person, so that they sleep comfortably on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And consider the nature of this condition so that its natural course is not disturbed, and do not force their head to the right or left at any time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And dress them according to their condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove him from that dark place and banish the cold view, and examine his condition, and return to dress the wound on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover this during the time of treatments or, if necessary, apply infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having noticed that you apply this for such a reason that water can leave slightly through great and violent observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs cautiously, you will notice that the pain diminishes after the seventh day, and correct any deformity in the affected area with this water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you clean the sight of it and place your attention on the oral side from which it is emanating, allowing its condition to improve for several days, present in the darkest season.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually consider that season, its causes, and discuss them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in illness the disciple of sight should not be excused from observing certain times, and then you will be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached those who are in the art of surgery, and one says that fire should be made in the air with a hollowed-out instrument through which water is drawn out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you may not have seen this perfect method in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the ways of the spices of medicine, that they may be superior to those who ignore them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of iron or steel, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end being so too in shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are diverse layers of flesh in the nose, each with its own cause, such as a growth of many feet or a polyp in the nostril, this malady is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is flesh cancerous, leathery, of dark color; and of this flesh is the lion's flesh not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should cut the malady between your hands and place it in the sun, dry the nose of it, and pick at the tiny parts in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract that from the parts outside, and carefully divide what you have understood from those by the subtle cutting of one part within knowing that all the flesh is held; if there is any cause from which the separation is possible, then use this as a tool to it with subtlety among the delicate means from which nothing causes harm.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the infection is accompanied by fever or acute post-apoplexy, then you should treat it accordingly; but if it is one of the malignant apostemata, then cut and cauterize that part which has become abscessed and leave all cavities intact.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then make incisions in the nose, carefully introducing either a knife or a syringe with water or liquid.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is blocked and you find moisture inside the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh turned to pus over bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should carefully insert the instrument into the area where there is any hardness, and gently move it in and out, and between each bone, using as much or as little force as necessary, and thus heal the patient and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either by cutting or for other reasons that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, it should be applied to the nose so that its scent reaches the nasal canals, and placed over the nostrils, for the troops who have witnessed such actions make children in schools, and it is a light cause for anyone who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then grasp both ends of the thread, one end emerging from the nose and the other passing through the nostrils, and apply pressure to the flesh with the threads, doing this until you know that the flesh is compressed around the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the thread and stop the bleeding with a cold compress, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is broken in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a gold tube into the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If there is a cure that can be ended, use it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the purgative instrument that distills oils and medicines from plants:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small lamp with a small cavity, and the inside appears like a hook.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a straw, and the tube of the purgative instrument is flat, open; it has a handle at the end, which you hold when you draw oil or water that you want from the juices and sucking causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgatives are valuable: prepare a mixture of castor oil, white balayra, ginger, and safron piletre, long pepper, fennel, and spices. Mix with lemon juice and make pills, and take one pill with warm water, it is thrown into the patient's mouth towards the direction of their pain.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow from the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Small bumps appear as a thread on the ends of the nose, and it swells and becomes inflamed over some days until a crust forms on it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And so it is important that you understand this at the beginning of its appearance, and attend to all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply over the area either a cautery or medicine that is burning, which is in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its inflammation is delayed and it becomes magnified, consider if it is lapified (ulcerated), hard, of dark color, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron or any other sharp object, for such bumps that appear at the site of this inflammation hold great malice for whoever incides upon this apostema.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is a serious infection and not of a dark color, sometimes it is possible to incise it entirely, drain the pus, cut out the infected tissue, and treat the area with something that promotes healing and prevents recurrence.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Capitol XXVI.**
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when there is an interruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit results from the operation except in certain cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause among these that indicates a recent infection, consider it as such and adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and then care for it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you must remove each part from its connection until it heals completely.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust both openings with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them and cover them with a thin layer of plaster or some other consolidating bandage, and leave it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the flesh is completely healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique for the suture is that you either add a solution to restore continuity as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	To extract those causes that come in both lips within the openings.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	These swellings are often seen in many people within the openings of their lips; some are hard like grainy errant matter, and others are softer or larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, he opens the lips and cleaves apart each of those hard swellings from every part, and then fills the space with a clean tripe, while restricting the opening; then it is washed with wine and treated with water that has been squeezed, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the tissue attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	In cases where swellings appear on the gum tissue that ancient physicians called albus, he should suspend them using tongs or hold them with forceps and carefully incise what is necessary into its base, allowing the healthy blood to flow and the opening to heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply sage or other astringent or drying powders to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, cut it secondly and cauterize it, for near the cautery returning is unlikely.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the cause of teeth falling out.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the loose teeth and between the gums there are tight, rough, scaly, blackened, or green deposits, this leads to corruption of the gums and the loss of nearby teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you must remove the illness between your hands, place the tip of it on the thigh, and extract the teeth in which these rough deposits and similar debris appear, without causing any further harm, and do this with regard to their blackness, greenness, and other conditions until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if there remains something in the beginning of reasoning, good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those points on another day and the following ones until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth require various forms and shapes of cutting according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the cutter with which the tooth is removed from its socket is different from the cutter used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of cutters must be prepared that you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth from its pain with all diligence and take your time in the complete eradication of it, because there is no reason to delay the moment when it is eradicated, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse is not accepted during the eradication.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the illness is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain may mislead you to believe it comes from an unhealthy tooth, and you extract that one, but the pain does not cease until the sickly, painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, to determine which tooth is painful, and as you know, when you uncover that it is necessary to sacrifice the gums around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is completely detached from the tooth, then carefully apply your instruments, or fine pliers, starting at the smallest point, until the extraction is complete.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And next, use pliers with strong teeth for good gripping or a strong tamping tool, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them, to avoid injury, and carefully extract the tooth according to its straightness in such a way as not to break it, or cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, insert it into the affected area with ease and effort, thus as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, you must gather a piece of cloth over that wound and twist it at the end of a fine thread so that it does not come undone during your constriction when holding it in place.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification carefully around the entire gum line and take care not to break or tear that part, then return to the patient for further treatment if the pain worsens than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless attempts at removal, for they do not administer what we have prescribed; often, they cause great harm to men, whose wounds become more difficult to treat, or they completely remove certain bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed on numerous occasions.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if pus flows from it, and red spots appear, then scrape some amount of it and sprinkle on the affected area, and if that pus does not come out, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and pliers should be thin and delicate, used to extract teeth at the beginning, with a short handle and a thick base, so that they do not bend when used in those ways.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should also be used with thick handles that, when first opened, are not bent, but rather have thin ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	These are made of Indian steel with right-angled ends, and on the ends of those instruments there are teeth that interlock with each other and open by strong contraction, and sometimes the ends of these instruments have the shape of a bird's beak, which is curved, and they are very stiff.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When it is necessary to eradicate a tooth that is lodged for some reason, you should place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the location is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak, called a ciconia or guanta.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their ends should be filed or sharpened with a chisel or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, then you should dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument named here as a small lever with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but long needle, and do not cover it, so that it does not bend.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, this one [instrument] is; otherwise, help yourself to these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument has an extremities triangular in shape with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now, with this instrument having two inclines, its appropriate form is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments used for dental extraction; indeed, this instrument resembling a large claw is used and its form is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a curved or straight triangular extremity, of some thickness, not covered to prevent it from bending.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools for drawing teeth are similar in appearance to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans, who understand the art, discover for themselves, according to the meaning of the operation and various ailments, those to which the ancient ones did not give name or pause with their proper instruments, because of their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is about the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth that are broken, then apply pressure with your hands in their proper place using the instruments and forceps we have mentioned for removing teeth, and aid yourself with the manipulation which this shape requires.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any hardness, small by small, and it is squeezed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or come out until the bone is completely healed, then restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, immediately remove the dirt and darkness from that hole and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth that stand out among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth stand out from their natural alignment, especially in women and particularly young, delicate ones, it is necessary to consider: if it is not possible to move or extract the tooth, then extract it; but if it should not be attached to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument that resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp steel from India.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made over the tooth in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not affect any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to the point of being damaged, then use this lime made in India in the shape of... (the text cuts off here but the context suggests it refers to the tool used for shaping or removing tooth material).
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of the iron from India and the margin should be; and it is made of very small points with a lime, whose teeth are gradually filed over several days in ease, so that there is no other tooth like it, which causes pain.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then carefully sew that at the end, and cut it with other razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth from which a fragment has come off and affects the tongue, then you need to file that space where the fragment's roughness is trapped, and smooth it out so that the tongue does not get hurt or the word is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot bear the pain, having tried various stipulative medications without success, it is then necessary to resort to those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, as silver becomes brittle and soon breaks, while gold remains unaltered for an indefinite period of time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness as to fit between the teeth; the shape of the insertion is that you take the wire and hold it doubled between two healthy teeth, and then curve it in a U-shape between two damaged teeth, or if only one remains, ensure it reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, tightening your grip with ease and skill to avoid further damage.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the tightness with which you hold the wire should be such that it does not escape from between the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the superfluous end of the thread with forceps or scissors, and insert them at any convenient place by movement, and turn them and hide them between the sound tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then bind it tightly with a linen bandage.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, hold it or those parts tightly with another thread in such a way that it heals completely.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the method of setting teeth and the form of correction for two sound teeth and two decayed teeth, as you tie these together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their original position in their respective places and have grown again as we have restored them, then they are improved.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is only done by skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is appropriate to use the bones of a cow, shaping them like a tooth, and placing them in the area where the tooth is missing, securing them as we have said, and they remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capital .XXXIV. (Note: This appears to be a section or chapter marker, not a direct translation.)
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament found in the tongue, which prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which prevents the tongue from moving, sometimes exists naturally in some individuals, or it can be acquired due to a condition that has already become solidified.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, freeing its lower part from the top; raise the tongue, and then carefully incise that nerve ligament according to the extent necessary to free the tongue from its restrictions.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or tightness in that place, which has been caused by the healing of an illness, then you apply oil and cut it apart along its width until you have severed the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a fissure in the flesh, and cut here behind the tendon, and let blood flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the clothes used for the incision with hot water or vinegar or friction with water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving; it is necessary that the patient keeps the tongue still at night so that it does not solidify again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, apply pressure over the wound with a clean cloth; if the blood is pus, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then address the other causes as well so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	It appears that the text you've provided starts with a chapter or section mark (Capitol .xxxv.), which doesn't contain specific content but indicates a part of a larger document. Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to offer a meaningful translation or interpretation. If you can provide more details or excerpts from the treatise, I'd be happy to assist further.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extracting the running (or draining) of a ranula, leave the tongue intact.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue becomes gangrened and appears like a small, black, dead piece, preventing its normal function; and if it is greatly enlarged, it is a cause for concern as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the treatment for it is to open the patient's mouth wide, exposing the gangrened tongue and considering the condition.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it has a pale or black, hard texture, by which the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that part, for it is brittle.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns out to be white and moist, you insert your finger into it, cut with a thin spatula, and cut from all sides; and if fresh air enters during the time of your operation, stop its flow by pressing a tight bandage, as soon as possible.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work as soon as you have completed it in its entirety, after washing it with wine and salt; and take care of the other remedies for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Capitol .xxxvi.** (This appears to be the heading for a specific chapter or section.)
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles (or possibly two types of abscesses in the throat) and others.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a swelling occurs in the throat, there are glands that become inflamed and protrude outward, which are called "two auricles." If you encounter this, follow the treatment as mentioned in the previous section, and if it does not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, dark colored, has little sensation, and do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the disease is of a certain nature and the cause is thick, do not touch it with a knife due to the flow of pus; instead, let it remain until it has matured, or you will extract it, or it will break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, hard, and the cause is subtle, then that must be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the abscess has rested and is completely healed or if it has decreased in size; then cease the malady in front of the sunlight, place the head of the patient low, open the mouth of him, and another servant takes between his teeth the tongue of the patient with a delicate instrument that has this shape.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it must be subtle with a sharp edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press down on that tongue and show the ulcer to your patient, and look at that peculiar mark, then take tongs and place them in the wound, and pull out as much of the foreign body as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then you cut with an instrument whose form is as follows:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled like forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the point of each one of those is in the right angle of the other, sharp, which is made of iron coated with metal.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula whose form is as follows: It should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one wound, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then close the incision with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If blood flow is to be stopped, rinse with a decoction of poppy or myrtle leaves similar to the causes of stricture until the blood flow is restricted and then treat that until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, there are other appendices or those two auricles, and you incise them according to what you have seen and said in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she was on the verge of death if more time had passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already infected so deeply that it had caused two openings, through which pus was flowing.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I will listen to him fisturally and remain in one of their chambers, pull it out, and the pain is from a great portion; then I will carefully incise that part where I understand the other wound begins, and I will press the mouth of it, and grasp its tongue, and I will keep the chamber in that position.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I will carefully remove a large part of it, and there will be no discharge from it but a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, it is absolutely necessary for that woman to drink a lot of water and eat food; thus you will not continue to incise those spots very often, but rather move on to another place in succession, which incision should be prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should heal and cauterize the wound of the patient, thus adding to it; and also walk around and do not clean what God has already done for me from that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the hernia when it is located.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh (accumulation of mucus) is in the hernia, and it is located and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the opening, thick and round, then it is called a bulge.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	It is treated as we have said in the division, and do not agree with your treatment, and indeed, there are times when the hernia has already been cauterized and is subtle, then you must incise those that are rounded; and if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, either a dark or black color, and does not feel warm to touch, then you must be wary of making an incision, for there is fear of aggravating the illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner I have said regarding its whiteness and length, you must ease the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument that shapes its form, and then return it to its place, and make an incision on one of two instruments that are used in making a double cut.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to puncture it except with what is suitable for the natural term of its addition, for if you puncture it more, you will damage its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two veins, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision, be daring in the cauterization of it, and the manner of the cautery on it is only sharp water, and this is how you place the head of the patient on the table, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take the water as indicated in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the hollow of the instrument whose shape this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The end of the instrument with the hollow in which the medicine is placed should be shaped like a spoon, and place the instrument on top of the medicine on the patient's chest, and let them rest their head on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the intrinsic action of the medicine, preventing any damage to their throat.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the throat by pressing for a short time until it is darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take hold and wrap that around the end of the finger, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the finger into a tube above, so that the cloth adheres to the tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, then with the cauterization, wash away the blood from around the ulcer using a cloth soaked in the medicine, and clean it thoroughly with water, and dress it with poultices until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This specific type of treatment is much safer than incision and avoids much fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times the ulcer is cured by something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scened arabic, camomile, broyth and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into one mix, and immerse them in wine and let them bubble; and the wave should be beaten decently with a wooden instrument shaped accordingly; it should be placed over a hole in the middle of the wave, upon which a small piece of silver or bronze is positioned.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the end into the opening of the patient's condition, so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the soft palate, until the uvula is completely obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process on any remaining moist spots, but be careful not to perform this treatment while the patient has an active apoplexy, as you would only exacerbate the condition; rather, wait for the apoplexy to subside before proceeding, and seek the advice of a skilled surgeon if necessary.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and create at its end a seal of wax, so that the mouth of the hernia is sealed, because the wax seal prevents the gas from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii. (Note: "xxxviii" is likely a roman numeral indicating chapter 38)
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of thorns and substances adhering to the eye, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may notice substances adhering to the eye or a thorn in the flesh or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So then, you should extract what is apparent from these [substances], focusing your sight on it, and using your tongue as an instrument before the light, so that you may clearly see what is in your mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is hidden from your sight in the stomach, be aware that you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause annexed to the stomach will be forgotten through vomiting; or he should swallow a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed lion's tooth, tie it firmly with thread, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can take an eel and tie it with thread, lay it on the table, and extract it slowly; or take a pig's intestine, open it up, and carefully extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the aforementioned causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thin but sharp, and at the end of it, there is a concave part which you will insert into his mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And he raises his head up high and watches the movement of his throat bone, so that he understands what causes him pain or if it's from the bone or the spine, or what cure the doctor applies to his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Yet if that disease infiltrates more deeply, it is better, thanks to the doctor's knowledge of the location of the cause and its attachment, and he drives it down below and applies his hand with the instrument to him, according to the amount prepared for him, until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter XXXIX.**
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating phlegm as we have discussed in the division of treatment by medicine and not surgically, consider the throat of the patient at noon under the sun, so that you may remove his tongue from the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood, extract that tiny or subtly moving one.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract that one, then take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's wound, and in the concavity of the needle, place a heated iron (as long as the blood has stopped flowing from the wound) and repeat this process several times, and then apply a poultice of water to the wound throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash it; do not spill any of that water and change it every hour when you feel the pain from the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if any of what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the wound with herbs or spices using the instruments suitable for this purpose in the treatment of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls in the right place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation through suffocation of that, is that you take a cloth in which carbon is ignited and the cloth is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is an opening, and the end of the instrument is placed in that opening; then move it towards the suffocation; and ask the patient to open their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not escaped until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, because the blood flow will fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, then you repeat the suffocation with motive again, and ask the patient to abstain from drinking, and eat salty and cold foods, and do not drink water, and so it is necessary that at this regime be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the vein when seen; it resembles tweezers as well, except that it has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a swan's beak, which is smooth from lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not cease.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the discourse in regard to apostemes and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemes are special spots, with various shapes and sizes, according to the memory of their origin, each one described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their piercing and sectioning in two ways: one is for the specific type of apostema itself; and another for understanding the humidity involved.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where bodily accidents occur, where a gouty joint may be in the head and another in the foot; or a gouty spot on fleshy tissue may differ from one in a joint; and each has its specific treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some wounds are such that they do not need to be pierced, but rather the maturation of the wound in those or the completion of their healing.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other wounds are such that they need to be treated when they intersect, and not allowed to mature according to their nature, also with wounds that are peculiar to joints, for a wound near a joint causes a prolongation of the pain as long as you can feel it in the circuit of the affected area, and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or if the wound is near a major member, and you delay its perforation while it matures, it will affect the main member; or it is near the buttocks, so you should not perforate it when it has not matured, but rather one that is peculiar to the buttocks, so that you do not allow the pressure of the wound to extend into the parts within the buttocks, and a fistula is formed, or something similar in its term that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is also important to know the right time for perforating the wound, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that recovery has begun when the pain ceases and fever subsides, and there is a reduction in rigor and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And also be aware that you should know how to make an incision in the infected area beneath the abscess, and from where pus is coming, as part of the healing process of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The incision should always be made through the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of pressure, of the nerves' cords, of the arteries; and, lastly, in any other spots that are not reflected; for in those that are reflected, one should use an incision according to the affected member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to delay making an incision until the digestion of it is confirmed by its completion, as we have said; for if you make an incision there before, it prolongs the course of the disease and increases the pain and hardens the edges of the wound, and deepens it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some openings may be made in the skin according to the thickness of the flesh or body part required by necessity, or as needed for the member.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to make small incisions, and in large openings make deep and wide cuts or sections according to the diversity of the size of the openings.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other types of openings involve the skin being cut and lifted, where a pan or similar tool is used to create an opening in a way that already exists, as if it had occurred naturally, like what happens in cases of abscesses and pustules.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut in sections with three angles; and of those where it is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as with the openings on the knees.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of their kind where round section and moon-shaped section are administered, resembling those mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If that which has no such signs of inflammation, only superficial pain, you should puncture with a thin and shallow needle.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the inflammation is thick and has collected much pus, you should puncture it, but do not be concerned about extracting all the pus at once; after withdrawing a portion, wait until the next day and then extract a larger amount, and repeat this process in stages according to its reduction.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is very young, a woman in labor, a small child, or an old person with weak spirits, because the animal spirit moves quickly at the exit of pus, and often the illness kills them, so you must operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Beware in this chapter, and be careful with your punctures when you puncture these abscesses; take care to avoid infections, and consider whether the abscess is small or a flat section, then administer the appropriate medicines; and if the abscess is large and the openings from the puncture are many, then apply pressure on each track until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the flesh is detached from the tendon or if it is concave in the contour, you should cover it with a thin piece of cloth or thread, just as when you use bandages or razors, to keep it moist; and reinforce it within three days, and then treat and cure it with poultices until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, you should administer clean water and vinegar, mix them in a cloth, and apply that to the area where the bleeding is occurring, pressing it several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you should then administer specific remedies and treatments, and apply powders recommended in various parts of this book and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter, and the area of the abscess is in a place with many nerves, you should then immerse the affected parts in hot water and oil, and apply that to the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply cool poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be changed every third day, as we have said, and you must loosen the abscess and cleanse it and apply what is suitable for its cure until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already said about each type of abscess, in what way it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses that occur on the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the head, small abscesses occur, which are of various types with layers that are formed around them; and each type has its own name.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them flow drops, and those contain moisture resembling lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling sweat, and similar to them; and those that are stone-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the extraction of all, and in the removal of those, there is no fear, as the removal of those does not cause any hostile reaction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in extracting those is that you expect those to be in the form of an instrument called entromes, as you know it contains them.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you cut those off according to their length by sectioning the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section from B to G. After the moisture is evacuated, you remove that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause for it to return, as all visible causes are removed.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian (or any) oil, if present, or in water and salt; fill that place with that remedy and leave it for another day, as this corrodes everything that is broken off from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat the application of that remedy with hot Egyptian oil according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no further cause for that skin condition; when the wound is healed, cure it with the ointment.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with grainy nodes, then you insert into it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Take a sharp knife shaped like a cross, and insert it between the two lips of the wound, cutting through from one side to the other, and use your strength to extract the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your bowels cause you discomfort, do as I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And for the abscess that is softened by section and cure, as I have told you, cut into the abscess that is softened is less severe, as it contains little pus and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Sometimes these abscesses are so hard in some people, especially older women, that they appear as a solid, hard, white lump, which cannot be squeezed, and if anyone were to strike it, they would be hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But for other abscesses that occur on the head, different from these, especially those that appear on children's heads and require the removal of hair follicles, the section should be only superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part of their bodies to prevent the matter of the wound from spreading to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply remedies as appropriate for that of the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collar.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often appear in the collar, armpits, and angles; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the collar, these are often generated among them, and all scrofula from those comes from their own tunic, and likewise with the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have remedied.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the treatment for these scrofulous conditions involves poultices, as some are stone-like and contain moisture, and others are malignant and resistant to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, if you perceive a good disposition in the touch, of which the color is characteristic of a bruise, and it is painful at all times, not attached to any nerve, vein, or tendon, and not swollen, you must incise it along the surface from where it is located on the body, away from the joint, within the lines .G. and .B., and remove it entirely, extending the lips of the bruise as much or as little as necessary, just as we have said about the bumps on the head, and extract that small part by small part.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it requires more caution that the vein or nerve not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the knife should not be too sharp, nor should it fit your hand tightly for incision, or inquiet the patient, and you must not inscribe what is not necessary to inscribe; for if you were to cut a vein or tendon, you would forbid the operation, then the ulcer would fester with vitriol or other powders that prevent pus from draining, and leave that place until the acuteness of the bump subsides and the ulcer becomes mollified, and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until the aid is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the aforementioned small ulcers, inquiring if there are any signs of infection from other causes; should you find any, incise and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the region of a large vein, you must be careful not to incise that ulcer in its region.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	First, be sure that the twisted piece of cloth is tightly folded and then carefully remove it without disturbing its fall.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with warm oil that you have already prepared using Egyptian ingredients and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you completely incise that swelling, you will see that you must bring together the two edges of the wound and soon there will be no excess fluid.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice that there is excessive fluid due to the size of the swelling, then understand that you must incise the base of it, drain it, and afterward, apply a bandage and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial piercing at the place where you see the maturation of it, and stop the piercing of what is the base of the pus in the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the piercing, you should find oil and similar things, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound has already been cleansed, then you should treat it with a healing oil generated from within so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capital .xxxiii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the skin around the abscess, make an incision.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to make this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen any person in our land who has ever done such a thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	One must be careful in patients who have stiffness, that the extraction of the abscess be avoided, because by doing so suddenly, all the veins and major parts of the disease may be affected here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bones, one must be careful to avoid the incision of the abscess to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to treat this, incise the epilhot (toes) along three or four small sections of the epilhot circles, according to their arrangement, cutting through the bone, not the cartilage; this part is suitable for incision as it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are visible.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, he should extend the knife blade gently, and then cut the cord along its length until it reaches the canal, while avoiding blood vessels whenever possible for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then, we incise the skin according to our recommendation; and it is meant with regard to cutting into the canal for the inflammation that is due to this very thing that is disrupting the flesh and by the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is passed for the piercing, add two layers of cloth from the wound dressing, and with that one alone, make the incision on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And we have extracted from Albucasis' work that the essence of this discourse, which we have summarized, is to observe that some of these ailments have already devoured the patient's flesh, and the illness has penetrated into the body, and others cut the epiglottis so that the sick breathes over the wound site for some respiration and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I will order the wound to remain open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and therefore, you will command thus with the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a knife and slices it into the throat of the patient, opening a gap in one of the ribs, and I was called to treat him, and I approached the wound thus as if it were the cry of the dying, and uncovered the plague and traced the scar which had come from the plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you confessed that she had not sliced any veins or guided the air from the plague, and the wound was healing on its own, which is how fire heals a wound.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not harm the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days, return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the removal of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section about a cut made over an abscess that occurs outside the abdominal cavity, it is called a hernia of the abdomen.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called a hernia of the abdomen, is a large abscess according to the body's color and it occurs more often in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, it is not engendered to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners: one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a diagnosis with certainty except for the patient who seeks help.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it and investigate it with your hand, if it feels like thick knots, not suspended from any veins, then incise it thusly with the nodes, and extract what it contains from the flesh and bursas; otherwise, scrutinize its whole being and treat the place accordingly so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section regarding the types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various types of knots, and I have already described all their species in the previous division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important that you distinguish the difference between a knot and an excursion, with doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that an excursion is heat and fever and severe pain until the ebullition of excess is calmed, and it is complete putrefaction when heat, fever, and pain cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	There is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it counts as a lion's roar that lies in the gut properly.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its commencement is like a cease and it is done thus with vacuum, both greater or lesser, and they are according to two kinds, either fat or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as you have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the cure for neither [illness], you must expel that and inquire about the commencement of the storm which is called the intrusion, according to how it will take its form in the chapter most appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this storm and insert that into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your threads around those spots little by little until you know that the storm has penetrated the flesh.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then close your hand according to the size of the wound, remove the entrails and consider what has remained in the tracks of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current humidity is neglected, regardless of its color, then you insert a knife into the superficial section as I have said in the other wounds.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity in the tracks of the entrails, then you know it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a knife having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, lift it up with the knife, cut away the skin from all sides easily, and extract the stone from that place, if you can, over which and take out that health from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is torn during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, and you should look closely at it, and then extract it slowly until nothing tears from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it does not tear from any cause, either little or too much, the hernia should return according to the best method.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the hernia tears from any small part, then complete the problem with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the problem, and place a bandage over the one that will become infected, and treat the other with the same care until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you will cut both lips of the hernia and treat that with this medicine.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If a pulsating vein is against it, or not pulsating, then you will cut and apply the place of a trig (possibly a bandage) that is wet with vitriol and let that strain for two days or three until the problem subsides and the swelling of the sanc (possibly an abscess) ceases; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for incision and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and there are three kinds, one of which is larger, and another is middle-sized, and the other is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and with great precision in the shape of tools, so that they fit into the incisions.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods of experienced ones, and they are named accordingly, and one of them is called 'berid'.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it is of three parts: one part is great, another is middle, and the third is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, middle:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, small:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is expedient for those with appositions, ruptures, fistulas, and hernias, so that between them are bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus are made round, thick, leathery ones, also with great needles sewn to them, using iron or bronze or silver wire, and the best are when they are made of citrus bark.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experience of black plums is made, which remember that by these openings are made in the cavity of whose reflections will be reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds, some being long, and others medium-length, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the experienced great plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced medium plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the experienced small plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the knots are like spices, some being simple, with only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their bodies' humors, there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these, there are two types with two curves, each of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curves each, of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple incision, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a simple half-incision:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple shallow incision, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a deep body incision:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a half-moon, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small half-moon, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The large half-moon has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The half-moon shape has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The small half-moon has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The large half-moon has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The half-moon shape has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The small half-moon has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels that are sharpened and cut through nodules and abscesses, and there are three kinds: one is large, another middle-sized, and a third small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large scalpel form:
Forma del scapel migier:	Middle-sized scalpel form:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small scalpel form:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp sections for making incisions, while the other ends are not sharp and are designed to be used in a way that prevents damage to veins or nerves during the excision of nodules, and for these reasons, they promote healing of the disease and restore tranquility, as well as the necessary adjustment found during the excorciation of abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of weapons, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a great magnet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium magnet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small magnet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and look like a beam on which alcohol is also poured.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the end of one side is a hidden blade, which cuts inward and outward, as you wish, so too.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the instruments, which are hidden among these parts for the piercing of the openings and do not harm the patient, are of three kinds: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of windpipes through which the flow of air is obstructed, and they are of three kinds; great, middle, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus skin, either round or elongated, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of windpipes be great, middle, and small, so that they obstruct the flow of air at the required speed, and are used when primary treatment is not sufficient for the illness.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using those to obstruct the flow of air everywhere in the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as the scales on the legs and thighs, and the scales on the arms, and the nipples, and the stomach, and the groin, similar to the fleshy scales of a fish.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times these instruments are made of small, sharp-like blades according to this form; by which the ganglion is cut off when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times these incisions are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the mammary glands of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the mammary glands of certain men are swollen due to the change in sleeping position and begin to be covered with hair; then the mammary glands become inflamed, and they are assembled (from women), and hang down, separated.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to do this, they should incise those parts of the moon according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the roughness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and adjust both lips of the wound with stitching, and heal whatever is inside so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the mammary gland recedes into the tissues and is softened by its magnitude, as it should be in women, then it should be cut in two parts, each with a pus-filled cavity resembling a moon, of which one holds the other, end to end, until the main line contains the smaller according to this form of the B. and G. lines, and then excise the cord that is between the two lips of the ulcer, stop the discharge, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, as necessary for healing, until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the illness and the flow of pus, then you should fill the ulcer with hot vinegar and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the rust, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are due to the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a puss that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And for those (abscesses) that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar section according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, you should close it with a bandage and check it again the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage remaining and treating it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the nodal species is, and of scrofula, you should incise it as we have said about scrofula generally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread so that it causes gangrene, then apply cauterization to it as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	**Capitol .xlix.** (Capitol forty-nine)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur due to arrows or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the wound is healed, which is above that, then pus is seen, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an arrow, a long accumulation occurs in the depth of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a hissing in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein returns to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is erroneous, especially in those left with open wounds, and in angles, and in the collarbone, and in most parts of the body; it is very large, so great care must be taken that its treatment avoids iron, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Place a poultice on the affected area due to inflammation of the archer's wound, cut the long cloth into a narrow section and apply it over the wound; then cut the section with scissors and uncover the wound, removing the clothes around it.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take the needle and make it penetrate between the two layers, opening the wound with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to urinate excessively due to the two hernias located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the pressure to the area between the two ligaments with a spatula until the pain disappears completely, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and care for it with suitable poultices until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is due to vein section, then you must place your hand over it as close as possible to the abscess at the back, and insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, making it penetrate; then make a double thread in it until you extract the other side, and bind the abscess with a suitable ligament according to what I have told you about the grape-like ligament from both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might tear, insert the needle into the flesh at a different angle, keeping the entire aperture of the first incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Next, dry the aperture in the middle part of it, while it is still fresh, then make an incision in the superfluous part of the cord, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice on it that you have soaked in wine and oil, and apply the treatment that is necessary until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the healing of an aperture that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, when an aperture occurs in the rear and in the veins, and it seems that an aperture occurs in the nerves when they are struck or suffer excessive work, or similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is applied to the places of the auxiliaries or the foot, or in any place where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it appears in their most vital parts; when it is tightened by violence, the patient feels a stupor from the malady.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an apoplexy of the body's front or back, and therefore the patient is left with a lock, and it affects the whole body and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it does not cover that it is invaded by iron, because their bodies will strongly resist contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One should apply that which is on the head or forehead with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then cut it open with scissors and sever that part from its root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with weights, cut it out, and close it; and secure the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs due to the inflammation in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Indeed, some people observe swellings in the abdomens of these individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble mushrooms; their root is subtle, while the head of that swelling is large. And the edges of these are convoluted, and it is from these that a great deal of excretion is produced.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in its belly were two parts that functioned similarly, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were everted and cracked, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut them open and compress the one in the foot with a weight of 18 ounces, and the other with 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the malady is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of fine size; then cut them with a broad knife, and bring the cautery near to them over the fire, for you must drive out the humors from their section quickly; and if blood comes out, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is very fearful and anxious, be cautious with incisions and needles; then take a fresh piece of lead, tighten that thread, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tension on the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been incised and falls off by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the part is of thick consistency, fear and anxiety have no cause in its incision, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you incise the hernia and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care that it is healed until the disease is cured.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to cut that which is of dark color, with little feeling, and moves slowly, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now I come to recall certain things regarding this illness.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of hernia (or "eminence" of the umbilical).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia (or eminence) of the umbilicus is caused by various reasons: either through gaps in the abdominal wall above the belly, or because of a bulge or protrusion of the intestine or hernia, as it should be in other ruptures; or due to swelling from veins or arteries, as mentioned before, or because of excessive gas confined within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is indeed due to a gap in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the intestine or hernia, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and it causes severe pain, and appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the evacuation of the intestine, you must observe the situation of that mass as we have described it, with greater variety, and when you press it, saying that it is hidden, then return; it is very sticky to its own place, and it requires much force for the introduction of water and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, you will feel a hard mass that is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained or ruptured.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these symptoms will appear as an abscess turning black and declining in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is hard, thick and durable, and it festers according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of that mass will be hard.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and dread as it is taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias from arteriovenous insufficiency.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must order the patient to take a supine position and be stretched; then make a cut around the entire navel, and command him to lie with his back between your hands over his loins, and then stretch the edge of the incision with a broad spatula around the navel; extend the extent of the hernia above and below its origin using a forceps or ribbon, and tie it firmly in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you should open the middle of the hernia that is extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that indicated place to explore the intestine; and if it is constricted or held by the ligament, you must extract it gently and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the fabric obstructing, then take some ointment and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circumscribe that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads, and through the loop you have made around the apogee in a crosswise manner, with the needles, which you make penetrate; then tighten the apogee in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you prefer, leave the needles and allow the flesh to stretch and fall on its own; or cut when it has thinned and can be removed, and then treat that area with something that covers and heals the wound.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the bulge of the navel is soft or due to moisture, then cover as you have done with the apogee, thus removing the pain or moisture that you find there, and treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of fractures.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have discussed, in division, the specific types of fractures and the manner in which they should be treated with medicine, and that it is harmful in them to use a bone for treatment lest it cause an ulcer; we have also spoken of fractures arising from the greatest care in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes fractures are in places where it is possible to completely eliminate them, as with the bone that is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the limbs, especially when they have just begun.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and severe, it does not respond to its own remedies, for you will neither heal from that nor have seen anything similar, nor has anyone else achieved success in that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is as we have said, you must proceed and leave the patient and purge them of black choler several times, and then drain that, if a manifest repletion is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and make incisions on the skin that cover it; and carefully remove from all parts with a good knife to avoid any cause of harm to the patient's rationality.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, do not abruptly stop it, press the spots, and wash the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at hand from among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it seems contrary to you to make a thick blood clot incision of a vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then care for it with the other remedies as long as it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops in water and the signs of each type, as well as their cure with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitres or the species of yposarcha, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydrops tympanitre with medicines and do not agree with your treatment, consider this, for if the illness has been weakened in the patient or it is another malady, other than that hydrops, also like those in the lungs or abdomen and similar to these, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you perceive the hernia to be of a luxuriant nature, and it is nothing but an accumulation of water only, not accompanied by any inflammation or pain, then the manner of operating on it is that you should lift up the hernia between your hands, apply pressure with your hand to its abdomen, drain the water from the opening left by the foreskin, and remove the spiky gas as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be from two sharp parts of long, with a pointed end just as with gas; however, make it of suitable length to avoid entering the cavity during operation, and hold it there.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydrops is from the cavities, for you will see that by sectioning near the navel, three openings are left on either side, directly over the foreskin.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrops is due to a disease of the intestine, then make your section left of the navel for three openings.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of the hernia is through the wall, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And be sure that your section is on the side where the disease wants to be, so that excess fluids do not flow to that place and cause inflammation.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce with the instrument through the entire ring, and insert your hand into that section, raising it with the spatula between the ring and the anus, and extract it; if it is of the size of a finger or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the anus until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that, and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or brass or iron, and in its initial part there is a small opening, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is cut according to the shape of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it, there is an armillar, for when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately moves over the instrument, thus evacuating a considerable amount of water at once; for if you evacuate less than necessary in one go, the patient's life can be seriously compromised due to the resolution of their animal spirit or they could suffer a heart attack, which is akin to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should evacuate according to the quantity that is appropriate based on the patient's condition, the strength of their spirit, and your interpretation of their symptoms from their pulse and the quality of their blood.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after removing the instrument, retain the water that is caused, as it is often held back by the string which holds the opening over the patient's chest; and I recommend to you that you perforate that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water from them several times a day for a few days, and be careful to avoid errors so as not to drain too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sand, immerse in bathwater, and expose to the sun for a long time; and apply drying medicines as needed until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And perform cautery on the stomach, and the bowels, and closely monitor water extraction as described in the preceding sections.
Capitol .lv.	**Chapter XXV.**
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose birth places are not perforated for urination.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times, a child is born from its mother's abdomen and the top of its mixture (amniotic sac) is not pierced (or it is too tight or not in the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should perforate the amniotic sac as soon as possible after birth with a gentle and subtle motion in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, in the opening of the amniotic sac, insert a subtle lead claw and tie it off, and do this for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, allow them to relieve themselves however they can; then return (the baby) to its mother.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not remove the lead (or stop the bleeding), it is possible that the urine, which has soaked into this area, will not allow this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	If that whose root is narrow is to be treated with lead, as we have said, for too many days before it is relieved.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the root is not in its place, it should be treated as follows, which is the cause of these people; when a person is born with a urinary tract obstruction, they cannot urinate inside, until the bloating in the bladder is raised up by manual pressure from above; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it becomes a malefic disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The manner of the operation on him is that the disease is turned towards his back, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand by vigorous extraction, and insert the tip of the blade at the opening of the urethra, as if it were a cut with a pen, or any other instrument, so that the middle part of him comes out, resembling the head of the bladder, and the root falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation to free the flow of blood, for accidents may occur; stop them with something that severs the flow of blood and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of an albaster (or white, delicate substance) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corruption, blackness, and adhesiveness of the prepuce at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Various accidents occur to this albaster on the penis, and its prominence exposes the flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malicious, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malicious, take care to suspend it gently and cut away the part that remains; then place a bandage with Egyptian ointment over that section, and apply the ointment thoroughly until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the wound is infected, of a dark color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and its treatment.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the wound is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one side of the foreskin is inside and the other side is outside, then you must hold the wound that is inside at the beginning until it heals; and simultaneously treat the wound that is outside, because when you cure that one, there is no guarantee that the other side will not be affected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also, there are accidents in the genitals and foreskin that turn black and swollen, so you must remove everything that has already turned dark or is about to spoil or has spoiled; then apply a line of medicine on it made with flour from ground millet mixed with crushed peppers and cloves.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And also, treat that with the other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there should be a flow of blood, then administer monthly cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cautery that is most beneficial has two purposes, namely to stop the flow of blood and to treat the plague when it is corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed in the process, then insert a platinum tube into the interior of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head (and this adherence only occurs in the one where the foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess), then carefully remove with an obtuse spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then remove with a spatula some of the matter from the head of the foreskin and the prepuce itself, and this is because when the prepuce is thin, it is easily perforated by its own delicate nature.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, which has already been soaked in warm water to prevent sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then, it is necessary to carefully cure it with a styptic agent until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the cure for what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence compared to other ailments; however, when it concerns our actions and our will, and it is done on infants, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the lightest possible losses for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free regions, because they did not include it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience the cause for which I have compelled the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and with cautery; and they use lint with thread and incision with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and do not find better relief than with scissors, ointment, or thread that in circumcision when the foreskin is cut off, two tunics are removed, and the tonica remains below, and often it must be cut again, causing certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the circumcision that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, does not ensure the incision of the end of the male member, because it cuts deeply into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, in the operation with cautery, sharp instruments must be used carefully to avoid damaging your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in many cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen such cases myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	On the preparation that is done with scissors and thread, I have discovered through experience its great usefulness, for the scissors are of a proportional incision, by which the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and thus when you apply your hand, the two sharp points are in proportion and cut according to a comparison at one time; and the thread is compressed in the form containing the knot of the whip from all sides, to which no error can be made.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understand a little, do not do anything but tie the thread to its hernia only, and let it be until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make that child happy in the way it understands, receiving its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure to be among the most prepared witnesses, and do not let anyone know; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over the child's feet so that it does not see those or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it by filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tighten the site marked with a thread, tie a small knot at the base of that thread, place your finger there and point to the location of the ligature left with good retention, and insert between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the rectum slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; clean the wound thoroughly, applying a small amount of powder and covering it with cloth in which mucus from the patient's nose is spread using warm oil; leave that over the wound for another day; and treat that with healing remedies until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities are not all of the same length, and some are shorter than others; the axis of the toe should not be left aside, and both its length and sharpness should match those of two handgrips.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the correction of this corruption lies in escaping the strong reaction against the intrinsic code entirely, or part of it, which must be incised.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary to extend the one from your side towards your finger, in front of the position of the place, and inscribe it according to this equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a pincet and inscribe that one.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and they see that the inflammation remaining at the affected spot is due to the trapped heat, then leave it until the heat is discharged, gently extract it, and inscribe according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, as it will not be accessible to you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that part which the plague solidifies with powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the spine in measure, and you adhere to the partitions of its parts, it will not be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to that part which we have said should be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or infection, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those described in the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not discharged and retention of it persists due to pressure, then be aware that the disease may curve towards its sides.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then you should place the patient's feet on their back and extend their belly by pushing it upward from behind, and the disease will tighten its grip on the affected part as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted, it facilitates the expulsion of urine from the retentive parts behind, so that the urine is discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the above-mentioned methods do not dissolve it, then you should address the cause of the disease, which is done by extracting it using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and have a thin, curved shape, like a reed with a narrow point at the end, similar to a palm and a half.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of urination through that is to take the urethra folded and tied at the end of a thread or string for proper tightening; and insert the extremities of the urethra into the opening between the prepuce, and cut with scissors if any superfluous cause from the string, but more insert it into the catheter with force. And then you enlarge the prepuce with the edge and with the albumen of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make incisions on the malignant growth over the skin, and open the bladder of the patient and the ulcer with oils mixed, olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the catheter with ease so it reaches the root of the ulcer; and fold the ulcer towards the opening of the meatus; and push the catheter from that side; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and that centring the malignancy being reached to its cause void, and is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes astray.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the urethra along the thread, as the urine dries the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, use a catheter, do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition improves.
Capitol .lix.	**Chapter LIX.**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder cleansing with stone and similar instruments that are suited to this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When bladder ulcers or abscesses occur in it, or there is a hardened discharge from the urethra, and you wish to drain water and medications into it, use an instrument called a clampstone, and this is how it should be done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	if at the extremity of it there is a dullness, it is closed tightly.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts to it: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a void, where something pushes out, and in accordance with its amount, it piles up, until when some cause throws it away from the humors, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled completely, it acts like a clamp that holds naphtha in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humor and throw it away from its opening, for the humor is thrown out into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp into the urethra as we have mentioned in the operation; and push the humor towards what you are pushing, for that humor soon reaches the bladder, and the illness arises from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is cristalized, and that shape is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or steel, it should be so fine as to resemble a small feather, and left within the wound as an implant.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you wish to crystalize within the bladder, and then tighten it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the blister.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand over the bladder with the humidity and stretch it gently until the patient feels that the humidity has fully entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then perforate that circle throughout its roundness; and insert the thread firmly into those openings, turning them around; and add the cloth thus enriched with moisture, oils, and water to whatever you wish to preserve.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you insert that in the instrument and make it as you have made the bladder, expressing with your hand so that the moisture goes into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	**Capitol LXX (70)**
De extraccio de peyra.	**On the Extraction of Stones**
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the distinction between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each type.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of stones that require surgical intervention by the hand, or incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they are narrating that same clear exposition and concise summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that the pain generated in the bladder is often felt by children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the illness rubs its thorn, causing frequent pains, and when properly treated, it heals completely.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that condition is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it is milder due to what exists between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose pain is greater and healing is more difficult; and if it is slight, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, we must begin by cleansing the malady with a christening that extracts the entire fissure present in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the entry of urine due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then take hold of the hernia near the patient's feet and press it gently to encourage the urine to flow into the bladder or, if necessary, to aid its expulsion from its position.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then apply that device between his legs, which is prepared, and the limbs of the patient are left free, so that the bladder is completely drained by tilting it towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then extract it entirely, along with all its parts.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the urine in the space, then quickly place a section over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch hold of the whole thing, then cover it with oil from the specific finger of your left hand, whether the illness is in a child or that small seed if it's a young person, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And when the stone enters, make sure that finger remains inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that pressure into small increments within the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure with that specific finger, and expel it outside through the passage of the area you cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the legs with their right hand above the opening, and with their other hand to hold the tail of the organ left exposed at the site of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a sponge into the incident from which this is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It then splits into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, before moving to the side of the left thigh; and the incision is made above that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made, so that the outer cut is wide and inner narrow according to the amount that the stone can be extracted from the buttock, not excessively, for strong understanding the saying that the stone in the buttock requires the cut to be made, and it is overlooked its weakness.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, so the excretion of it becomes difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it is like a grain, round, and made of the lighter excretion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is one that has edges and corners, fit it into the gap.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your hands over it, or tighten it with a gesture appropriate to the task, the extremity of which is as sharp as a stone chisel with which you tighten it on the stone, and do not slip from it; or insert between them a delicate instrument with a curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut it with strength using vitriolic water.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder and cut it; then push a little water in; and seemingly, they will break into two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very intense, ignorance is that you insert this great section, as it causes the illness one of two things: either it stops (the pain) or it leads to the distillation of continuous urine, for which the location is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If it is necessary to expel what is inside that is foreign, or to repair a fracture using pliers to extract that which is in the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	After you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to ensure that the heat is gently released.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And as that is loosened, moisten the area with water and oil, then apply a mixture of fine-ground ointment and powdered alum until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of gangrene, cauterization and incision are performed, and from that similar symptoms occur as if the ice has frozen in the bladder, and due to this the urination is hindered (and this is known as the expulsion of urine), then immediately apply the common treatment for the plague and extract that pus, for if it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose it to all species, which is beneficial for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the hours of treatment, make sure you do both things and adjust the medications that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, and its passage is blocked, and urination is prevented, then treat it with what you have previously described to achieve dissection, because the troops used for this treatment are often accused of causing dissection; and already having extracted it, it is that you take a metal perforator, whose form is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular end, sharp, lodged in the bladder.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take a thread, and tie it to the urethra after removing the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the metal into the urethra, drilling with ease until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you drill the penetration of it until you achieve the other side to penetrate; for urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then apply your hand to what is broken from the stone of the hernia outside the perineum, as it is squeezed and freed from urine, and the illness is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason, then tie a thread around the stone and another thread on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close the hernia on that perineum between two folds.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the ligament and clean the infected wound, which is formed in the ulcer.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other ligament on top, for when the thread is loosened, the hernia returns to its place and the ulcer heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this, it is necessary when you tie the bandage around them, that you raise the leg to its positions, or return it to its proper place, and secure the plague thus as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	**Chapter LXI.**
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	**On the extraction of stones from women.**
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you do see a stone in any of those areas, treatment is difficult, and it is hindered by numerous methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their weaknesses is that women who are strong in spirit become weak at the sight of blood.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second weakness is that you will not find a woman more knowledgeable than herself to discover if she should go to a doctor when she is pregnant, or whether she is married to a man who knows medicine.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third sentence translates to: "The surgeon is he who does not hesitate to operate on a woman, especially when it comes to a difficult case.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth states that "the place of incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so a deep incision is required, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, you may need to call upon a skilled female surgeon, who is hard to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking in those skills, seek out a surgeon with experience and subtlety, or present a female midwife well-versed in the treatment of women, or a woman who has herself undergone this procedure.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, command this present one to do all that you instruct, from the examination of the stone to its removal; for which reason he must consider if the woman is a virgin, and then insert his finger into her anus to assess the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that, cut it off, leave its tongue, and then command him to inscribe [it] upon that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel around on the pelvis, for she places her left hand upon the bladder and feels with great care.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that, gradually massage it from the painful area of the bladder to the parts, with the help of your strength until you reach the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then inscribe upon that position of the body's weight from the root of the matter, and place the foot on that part, and his finger should not be withdrawn from the pelvis.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the ray upon that section, and if the bladder is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity, knowing how much urine will be discharged from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the spices of pepper are varied: for there are small and large, sharp and bitter, long and round, and they have scales.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many species there are of it according to what you have said about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to stop bleeding from a wound, apply vitriol trise in the area and let it act for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the pepper is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to stop bleeding from a wound, and you know that the expulsion of the wound is from the deep incision, then place powder on the area and gently press with these poultices and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for the strong pain will die in the illness.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the disease.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the pain of the wound diminishes after several days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white flesh, which leaves the gate open for the intestines to escape, and it is called the inguinal canal.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural fat that prepares itself as a passage for the intestine, which is already another hernia; and it is the gate of the genitals between the white flesh that we have mentioned, and it is not this but an inflammation.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the cause of this hernia is the weakening which occurs in the muscles, for to those this material is discharged, and sometimes it occurs due to blows made on the muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has no distinct color, for its color either declines to citron or bloody, or red, or it is black and sticky, or white watery, and it is that which is most important.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white flesh that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and declining slightly in length, also appearing like a mushroom, since the moisture extends from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fatty tissue, then the swelling is round and divided from the muscle, and thus one estimates that it is another muscle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if moisture is between the joints of the toes and the white ciphas (toes), then scratch from below to remove the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the colour of the moisture, you should observe the colour of the moisture in the place where it emerges from a corrupted (or diseased) part; and according to what is observed in the trace of the emergence, judge what lies within.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should understand that you command the patient to urinate if possible, and wash the part affected by it.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then make the patient lie down on their back for some time, and place clean sheets beneath them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and instruct the assistant to follow the right side, extending their finger from two fingers' width to the joints of the toes and to the belly's opening.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad knife and cut through the cord of the testicles at the middle of its length near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the second cut according to the same measurement from the line you have marked for removing the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white part inside.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And extract it, observe, and be careful not to pierce through; your incision should be as wide as necessary but delicately scrutinize the second incision according to the amount you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then, using a wide puncture, pierce the white part filled with water and extract all of it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then, separate the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend the white part to its sides; do not touch the cord of the testicles, and cut the white part in that manner as best as you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut through the membrane completely or into the muscles, especially their thin layers, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is a risk that the fluid will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if during the course of your procedure you find that the hernia has returned outside of its original position at the time of your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the wall, go back inside and adjust both edges of the hernia opening from the genitals with sutures, and treat it just as you would any other wound, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must close the vessels that are above the suspension, extract the hernia, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water is added in two parts, then you know that both are hernias; so cut the first part according to what you have done with the other, and if it appears to be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then cleanse the wound, and enter into the sections with a cloth submerged in oil or warm oil; place another cloth that you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both legs and the wonder of the abdomen; then lay it upon folded sheets and poultices, and bind those with a dressing according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two sheets and make them humid with worm wool; press the extremities where they join or are touched by moist wool, and add structure in the crotch of the trousers, one extremity taking up the buttocks between the two, and the second taking hold at the opening of the leg, and the other two extremities on two sides leaving two others over two angles, and all tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting; so you take a fine cut-throat cautery and make an incision at the root of the legs, and light it according to what we have recommended while it is exposed the white skin containing the water, and then take the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that seal, and light it until all the humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the seal with scissors, cut it with scissors, and burn it with a subtle flame; incise according to your ability until you erase all of it; and be careful so that the fire doesn't touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is much safer and farther from the flow of pus compared to amputation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you difficulty to perform an apostema cautery (a type of surgical incision or burn) during amputation or in the moment of cauterization, or if there is a pus flow, then address what contradicts you with respect to this, as a cure that suits it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation because of its horror, then perform an incision as recommended; it is at this point that you, based on what we have said about signs, must be certain that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you understand that you must treat the disease on a raised spot, then perform an incision in the lowest part of the abscess close to the edge, and pause the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And when the opening is wide enough, draw out all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area tightly and hold it there to ensure the water does not reenter.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care of it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is a contradiction to the flow of water at that time, when you perforate it, it should not be done unless the white panniculi in the orifice of the ulcer causes hindrance and prevents the outflow of water; then place a plug or instrument designed to extract water from the cysts in the ulcer, whose shape is preceded; or use a small amount to adjust the pressure on the ulcer.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that water returns and the swelling subsides after about five or six months; and when it accumulates again, it is perforated in the same manner as before, for thus the illness will pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	**Chapter LXIII**
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	**On the Section Regarding Carnous Hernia and Its Treatment.**
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is great fear of its becoming mortal; for it is my opinion that its dismissal and salvation lie in those remedies.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And they are reminded of the operation on those and the specifics of the apoplexy.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the apoplexy occurs in bodies whose vessels are composed and is done by two main causes: either by a sudden, intense inflammation that overflows into the vessels, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the apoplexy varies according to the color of the body, and it is not painful in itself, but a severe apoplexy.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	Very rarely is the apoplexy hardened, of which the color is dark, and it is not painful to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the contraction of the arteries, or by inflammation of those areas where one already feels the memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that what is called inflammation of the joints is due to the escape of pus from the abscess when you press on it; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	If what is formed due to vein inflammation is not dispersed from it for any reason, you should not press on it.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this species one makes an incision and on the other meats; and you insert the knife into the openings of the genitals, then extract the white-colored mass from them, sever the suspensory muscles of the vessels, tie them, and make incisions in the suspensory muscles that you severed from all parts of the genitals.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the testicles have already been consolidated in those meats, then you should extract them and make incisions in that part.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the wound, or between what lies between the bones, then you must dissolve all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the adhesion is a natural growth in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must dissolve everything that belongs to it, and extract the humour as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an aperture (hernia) enclosed by a sac-like structure resembling a bud with the softening of the testicles, making it difficult to move and walk on account of the patient's condition.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, great care should be taken regarding what precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I note that they mention operation in the second instance when I perform the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you should cease the illness over a raised cushion; then, pull the suspender of the testicles towards the sides; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hands, close to the roots, where they are proved on the flame; and have those other assistants, and extend them with vigor.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then, incise with a sharp knife across the left path of the vessels while they are still uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from every part as we have said in the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with two threads, fasten it to the first part where the pain occurs, and repeat this process at the end of their course.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make incisions in the middle of the affected area, cutting deeply according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul humidity and corruption.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the plague with remedies for other plagues in which you wish to avoid generation, so that the vessels that carry the seeds of two origins do not remain, as it is not harmful by itself.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the veins are affected, then remove the testicles or tie them off to the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the veins and become atrophied, or tie them off so that they do not grow again with these.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdomen, extending from the blood vessels of the abdominal wall, allowing the intestines to protrude through the opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either of the abdomen or of an excrescence, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movement, loud noise, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The indication of this, when it is due to abdominal extension, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, not suddenly, and it is a swelling that pushes the intestine outward, entering the peritoneal cavity.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is cutting in the foot, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it appears as an ulcer near the toe most often apparent, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the matter of it comes out from within the foot.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine's membrane is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernial protrusion.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by pressure, and sometimes it runs in the hernia gap, and here it is retentive, and this causes great harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, caution is required, so that one must be careful not to miss the timing in their application.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the hernia with their hand to the inside of its cavity if they obey its return, and then place yourself between their buttocks with your hands, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then narrow the cord that is the cord of the testicles towards its roots, and cut the cord of the testicles completely through; and then fix in two layers of the incised section as you deem necessary to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to achieve, then from that, a hole will have been made.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then remove those bodies which are left by the cord of the testicles, as long as the white hard body of each partition is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white ligament, which is beneath the scrotum, and between the second ligament, and dislodge that adhesion behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then, with your right hand, grasp the cord of the testicles from outside, and extend the white ligament with your left hand, lifting the testicle towards the scrotum; command the assistant to spread the testicle apart, and you will dissolve the adhesion behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your fingers that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white ligament tightly.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause (for the condition), then press down on the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with very thick thread made of five parts, and insert it through the last part (of the ligament), which is beneath the testicle's cord, which is cut; and cut the ends of the thread that protrude from the ligament in such a way that they form a cross; and tie to that the ligament whose cord we said was left below the testicle tightly from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the bandages tightly, binding them with a strong ligament, so that none of the vessels they cover can transmit any cause for infection from hereon.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then make another ligature a third time, far from the first, and close to the base of the scrotum, where the quantity of enlargement of it is most notable; cut off all the remaining edges according to their roundness, and remove them from the testicle.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the opening below the cord of the testicles, sectioning it in such a way that blood and pus flow out as we have discussed above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; place it on the abscess, and use the ligature we have recommended (and sometimes the white cautery, as we said, is applied, which can cause bleeding, for these reasons it is left until the ligature falls out).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case of the patient is delayed, then water should be poured over it and applied to that area as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with other remedies for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Chapter LXVI**
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventose Hernia**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that suggests a remedy for it other than to cut off the affected part.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first step is to perform as we have recommended for hernia, which is to cut open the vessels near the section with ease; then dry the middle area around the abscess with something that will facilitate its healing, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the illness as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	**Capitol .lxvii.**
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, dislocations break the joints as we have said, and the bones protrude from the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not mention any cause of hernias to the learned; and if they do, it is rarely; and it should be treated immediately.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the condition is prolonged, a fissure in the muscle should be corrected before the hernia descends into the muscle; this happens due to the expansion of the muscle as we have said, which causes the area to become weak and protruding.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery as was mentioned before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, the cure is achieved by cutting according to this manner: the hernia moves towards the middle of the body between your legs, and then dry the site of the rupture of the prominent aponeuroses with a cut along its length according to the quantity of three digits.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white strap that is under the ribs until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the stick and place it over the prominent site of the strap, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then press the two prominent sites on the end of the strap's ray, and adjust the suture with one of them to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the strap, and do not press the hernia into the abdominal wall completely, nor extend the pain, or any other cause as you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then apply the cure for the plague, and after incising the abscesses, cleanse it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; for the ulcer is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better at this location, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testicles becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and it is important to pay attention to its condition.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for those who are engaged in the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back and incise all the softened cords that exceed the natural cord, and then close two lips with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at the beginning, when the excessive fluid of the softened cord is three or four fold, perform a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the sutures; and carefully care for the healing of other ailments within, so that they are healed and the discharge falls.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of reminding you in this book, I will speak of it; and its remembrance is only necessary in two ways, of which the one is so that the physician may understand it when asked about its cure; and the other way is that we are sometimes compelled to castrate other animals for our children's health, as well as from dogs, horses, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by a cut through a fracture.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and pliable, so that they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not show the mark of the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration by cutting through a fracture, hold the animal and with your left hand press on the cord of the testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then connect the suspension, and cut through each with a section, so that two parts proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then you will cut those pus that you find somehow erupted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause untouched regarding the cyphacs, but rather the subtle cyphac that is upon the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by tying, because strong binding leaves no cause for the testes, so that the beast does not desire to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then attend to the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an obstruction in the space of the scrotum containing testes, and another form appears as if there are two testes, resembling a female's ovaries.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some times, this flow of urine is seen from the opening in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a difference: their womb, similar to a man's penis, has two ovaries, slightly smaller than a man's testicles, as well as the vagina and clitoris.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you cut those tight clothes that prevent the flow of urine, and then treat them with a remedy for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second type of men, where urine is released from the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of springtime and flesh swelling due to the causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the liver, strongly connected to natural causes within, is observed and must be carefully considered; sometimes it is magnified in some women as much as it is in men and even pervades during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So then you must have the excess of liver fluid in your hand or between your fingers and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And finally, do not forget to insert, especially at the point of the razor, so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then take care of that which is under cure from the plague until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is born is flesh that lacks in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills out and becomes strong; for this reason, at times we incise thus as we do with lint, and heal it until it is cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the care of wounds.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Wounds are those where the skin of the woman is not pierced or a small laceration occurs.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental wounds are caused by gout which has preceded them, or by flesh that is not properly adjusted, or by a subtle and deep cut.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done either in the region of the mother, or on the sides of her, or in the upper part above her, or in the lower part below her, and it prevents conception and childbirth, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the mother, if the swelling is apparent, it is considered valid; but if it is not apparent, then you should seek it from your fingers or from the palm.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the swelling is very subtle and located between the two lips, then you should cut and disrupt it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it should be placed over the two delicate lips, and then your fingers indicate both the most affected areas.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then force open both lips to break that subtle swelling and open the swelling.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil, place it over the area, and apply heat to the site daily so that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the swelling is large and thick, then cut into it with a sharp knife or a splinter of myrtle wood.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is due to food, then hang it from a hook and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of pus from its bite, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and vines, adjusted to the white of an egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the infection from healing quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it with cotton for several days and apply a cold compress from it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural origin of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene that is in the limbs should not be treated contrary in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and pain in the tail, and the red botch that occurs in the woman's buttock.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of the mucous veins, rather than from those that are deeper; and as they become old hemorrhoids, and when they have been treated with heat.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And already have I discussed in division the kinds of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those there is no cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	May those that are in the upper part of the body over which sensation is felt, for those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be aware that you place the woman in a reclined position, extend her legs with a spreader, and close them with a strap or rough cloth, and insert those into the cracks.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those parts the flow of sacred fire from one of the burning powders, thus as with ash and similar things.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of pus persists, then make a incision in decayed and swollen parts, and drain them of milia, ecchymoses, and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take ordinary flour and mix it with honey, wine, and make a paste from this over the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess has burst, it is good; otherwise, adhere two vents to the back and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse it in cold juice of colander or cold juice of artichoke or cold juice of gravel root, mix with wine and make it adhere to the place; and care for the place with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Maybe the text reads: "May the patient, who suffers from a severe and acute condition, understand that you must do this according to what appears to you from that which I have said in detail.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that which is inside, so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	**Capitol .lxxiv.** (Capital LXXIV, meaning the 74th chapter or section) is not enough context to provide a translation without surrounding text. If this refers to a specific medical treatise or document, please provide additional details or relevant sentences for accurate translation.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket in the skull.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	You may encounter various types of abscesses in the skull, including crusty and abscessed ulcers, eruptions, fistulas, hemorrages, ruptures, cysts, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments and their types, the signs of those conditions, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise of apothema the method which you see used for those which occur in the body, and if you wish to know the manner in which the operation is performed on them with a knife.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore consider whether the pain of the apothema at its beginning is acute with percussion and fever, and sometimes that feeling becomes inflamed, if you do not cut it with a knife, then cure it with what aids its maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then know that you must cease the woman's pain on a bed which has two supports; recline her on her back and position her feet below her abdomen, expanding her thighs and resting her arms by her sides, and tie some to the bed with suitable bindings.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the head of the bed and administer the instrument which opens the orifice of the mother, the form of which will be discussed regarding those causes that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to use this instrument, hold the head of the knife against the skin of the woman's breast, and let not the part that enters into the woman be greater than the head of the knife, cutting through the disease.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the head of the knife, then be careful to place poultices on the skin of the breast over the knife's edge so that no part of the instrument enters into the breast.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And be careful to place the tourniquet above the instrument's blade, and let the person holding the instrument open the wound of the breast until the tourniquet is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears and it is sore and hot, then be careful to dry that part with a wide spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And after the discharge has been emptied, be careful to place in the wound a bandage dipped in warm oil or green oil containing some constriction; and press the pad on the incision of the breast.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the wound a clean cloth soaked in water with lavender.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then the cure is considered complete after two days when the pain has subsided and it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the pain are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then treated with water in which rhubarb or long-stemmed plantain has been boiled, and then returned to the original mixture.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the pain is deep inside a closed wound, then you must abstain from treating it with fire, and instead use the methods we have mentioned above.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv. (This appears to be a heading or chapter number, indicating the beginning of a new section in the medical treatise.)
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner embrioic vices should be treated when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A midwife must recognize the beginning of labor through signs of nature, for when she sees a woman expelling the parts and desires to smell the air, she is urged on by what is upon her during childbirth, and hastens the emission of the embryo; then know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it is the emission of him over his head, or suspended or dangling from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that the womb is contracted so that the embryo departs slightly as it passes over its head, and it receives the second breath, and is freed from those superfluities with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who deviates from this part is unnatural and not commendable, for when the embryo is emitted over his feet and his body is positioned with his head behind him and his feet up, or his hand on his foot or his head, or his head and hand are positioned over his belly, and he is strongly bent over his spine, resembling his unacceptable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For a midwife it is necessary that she be wise and subtle in all those cases, and guard herself against errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you will show all the features of those, and what the art is in those so that it be understood for this and has been about this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the sensation is located on his head by natural heat, and that heat is intense in the woman and becomes difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of it is already debilitated, then she should cease, or what women have it, and evaporate the congestion of it with fennel seed and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then the midwife should insert herself between their dilated lips, and apply a second time to that wound, or rather to her finger within it, pressing what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If they do not wish to, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fennel powder mixed with oil.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command them, apply the compression, which should be changed and done in such a way that it causes sneezing; and close their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the effect is forgotten soonest.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both effects are forgotten at the beginning, then cover them with increasing ease, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mattress and lift her legs up, and then lay the mattress on the ground; and have the woman hold herself so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the effects are not reversed and the condition worsens, then cut those and extract the pain from the body or tie the body to the bed with strips and extract it with equal force, as that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the positioning of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is positioned on its feet, you will see that you need to push them inside, and then reduce the size of the opening, and gradually pull each one out, taking care not to break any part.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If they are squeezed inside, you must command them to come out, and help them expel the child in a controlled manner, for it is up to God to decide their fate.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if the child is not delivered as recommended, then return the fetus slowly back inside until it finds its natural position, for attempts to force it may lead to complications.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that has been recommended proves impossible, take a mixture of other herbs and a dissolving gum, grind them well in a mortar with careful and strong blows, and apply the resulting paste to the woman's womb, focusing on the lower part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in tepid water, until you reach the hypocondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the incisions have healed, then perform the smoldering of mint and gently press it against him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the smoldering for an hour, then make a new incision on top of it, and force him to sneeze and open his mouth, take away that mucus, and press gently on the lower part of his belly with a light compression, as soon as the formation is dislodged.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Assess the condition of their hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition is as described above, then skillfully insert your hands little by little; have the woman bend over her belly, let his feet hang down, and rest his back on the ground, and arrange her hands accordingly.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then apply pressure to the patient's belly little by little, and extract what remains in their feet from the edges until it is ready for the release of pus afterwards.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not expelled, take the patient's feet and gently move them, then apply pressure to the hypogastric region little by little until the fetus can be delivered.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your fingers and gently turn the fetus little by little, and instruct the woman to push until the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Extract the fetus longitudinally using one of your fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be ingenious in reducing the woman's pain, but if you cannot alleviate it, then raise the woman and have her lie down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it is impossible to move them, make the patient lie down, and gently beat their limbs with a hammer, then apply ointments and bandages that you have prepared from mud.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has begun, then make the woman lie down and gently pull on her legs to bring the child down, then carefully reposition the baby in the birth canal according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, ordering her to hold still until the passage is clear.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The child, its limbs expanded and pressing against the womb's walls, is positioned at the two o'clock position relative to the mother's belly.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the child's limbs and slowly turn them to ensure the baby is in the correct position, making it easier to deliver.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is completely delivered and the head is what we have previously prepared with oil and mud, then apply pressure on the birth canal to complete the delivery.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then gently command the patient to breathe in and out slowly, when you have done this, make them lie down on their side, and command them to turn onto their back, and then command them to move their legs; and make them sneeze in that position.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare for the exit of the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider it, and then gently insert your second finger into your own palm to expel the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck, insert your finger into the opening of the womb, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus gently towards the opening until it stops according to its strength, and command the woman to compress herself occasionally, and it will be expelled easily, God willing.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that conjoined twins are born, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and rarely happens; however, these may be the result of nature, not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And consider those cases, whether they are multiples, one after the other, and they are separated by surgery, distinguish those who enter the ligament in each others' navel, and sometimes they are forgotten; also, some are born like this due to a natural phenomenon, and some due to an untraceable cause.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult cases regarding their birth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then care for them as we have mentioned.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does it in a way that makes it easy and discreet, delays as necessary, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body with the right means for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder that it forms in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they form in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have already verified that a woman who has aborted cannot conceive again, and another who is completely formed causes great harm due to the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is known to be in the science of midwifery how strong they should be to that young woman resembling this, and therefore they pay such attention to it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi. (76)
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not outside, and you are forced to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not subject to any of the accidents by which she is feared to suffer loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now cover the woman so that she lies on her side with her head tilted downward and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold both parts or be positioned on the side so that the patient's body does not extend beyond during the delivery.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and a mucus of althae and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife places her hand with those oils and mucus, smoothly enters her hand into the mother, and seeks out the place where the cuts in the fetus are located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this regard: consider then if the fetus is ready to come out on its head, and you should prepare the cuts in the soles of his feet, or in the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the furca of him, or in the places near the ribs, or below the hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the pain originates in the feet of the patient, then it is located in the toes or in the middle of the spine.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it should be held with the thumb of the right hand, bending the patient's body at that point located between the fingers of the left hand, and inserting the other hand easily, so that the thumb reaches the source of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then it should be held and maintained in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, so that they are equally attracted, without excessive extension according to their natural state.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it is beneficial at every step, so that the condition of him is alleviated as it is done in various cases for the eradication of pain.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them, where the extension should be softened; if any part of him is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her special words and insert those carefully and turn them over to that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the hernia protrusion is overlooked, the incisions should be changed to where there is more pus; and do this until the entire hernia is withdrawn.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is excessively swollen and cannot be reduced by compression, it should be wrapped with a bandage; then extract it gradually until it is completely withdrawn, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or on the finger.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the hernia's head is large, or compression in its emergence causes it to be tight, or it is located at the top where the edges are close together, then insert between the sharp spikes and cut off the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", which resembles the shape of other instruments described in the appropriate chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And apparently, the making of this operation is of great importance by nature: and then you will see that it cuts into that hard crust or takes up that swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is hardened and compressed, then its fork must be cut; then its split should allow the fluid in the foot to escape.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not contradict observation, then you should cut the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the hernia from the abdomen is inflamed or resides in a wet place, then you must perforate that space through which the fluid within it can escape.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the operation is on their feet, then the attraction of the hernia should be relaxed and its direction to the opening of the sac should also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and foot are squeezed, then you must remove that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and foot until what is inside comes out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are trapped and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the mother's vagina is blocked, insert your hand into the opening of the vulva, seek for a child's head, and bring it towards the mouth of the mother, and then insert one finger, or two, and pull it out.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is blocked by an apoplexy that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to strain it; instead, first remove the cause of the excessive humidity and fat.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices, and keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the issue is on their side, try to use an incision if possible; and administer what we have said regarding the living flesh.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the flesh and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause inside after the second operation.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the cure for the wounds that may occur from the heat.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of pus, then use strict waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose womb was causing death, and then again over that fire another conception has taken place, and the other fetus is dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his leg; it swelled until it opened like fire, and he began to feel pain.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were initially called to treat them, and you treated them for a long time with medication, but the plague did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should consider the patient from various causes and apply strong plasters, breaking one bone after another; he will spend several days, and then another bone will break; and you will be greatly amazed when there is no bone in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they are the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Thus, you will continue to investigate the plague, extracting all bones from him, taking out the remaining flesh in his best arrangements, and already experiencing such a manner for a long time, correcting him with a small piece of flesh.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be strange that it should be thus, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the patient, so that the doctor with his hand administers cure amicably.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the strangulation instrument in which the edges are engaged, which engagement has two cutting edges on both ends of the instrument.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this cutting edge should be neither too sharp nor too rough, and it can be made of bone, ivory, or wooden material.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each stick should be such that two sticks fit together, and the margin of both sides of each stick is one finger's breadth, and the length of each is half a palm; in the middle part of the two sticks, there are two adjustments made of the same material as the other stick, whose length is equal to a palm and a little less, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the container so that it opens to those you turn the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form resembling that subtle and lighter pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wood or bone according to the appearance of tweezers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	You may also insert two additional parts at the extreme end of it, each with a length of about a palm and a width of approximately two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the container, you lay the woman on her side over the foot, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand over the instrument using the clamping forceps as you wish, according to the amount needed from the mouth of the container until the meter indicates what you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of turning that the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that which is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as described, which contains the great cure:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps which has teeth at the end, also when using, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, also when using, which has teeth like a file with which it cuts and contains.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of healing sparingly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Method of digging without a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Method of digging without two spikes.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with teeth that close together to hold the head of the child.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A spatula with two ends, one of which cuts off the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercises, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, they become easier to use and more useful for people in general due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second (tooth, bone, etc.).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they exhale, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, then take a hot perfusion and make a hole in the covering, placing a sponge soaked in warm water over the mother's mouth, as well as hot and harsh herbs such as chamomile, aromatic ones like Arabic and cassia wood, and sweet-smelling ones like Saint John's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs, or some of them, should be submerged in water within the perfusion, and then placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then attach a canvas tube to the mother's mouth and ensure it remains in place as the steam from the herbs enters the mother's cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second should be released quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure does not work and it is not excessive, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of alder, and then insert that hand into the vagina and search for the second one, and once found, gently pull on it little by little as necessary so that the mother does not feel too much pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Once it is confirmed that the pain is in the right or left side, treat it accordingly.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and resists adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is restricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and the treatment of all parts with herbal medicines.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to perform any abstraction over that which is left from it to the mother's womb, but instead cauterize it with a discovery and tetradyman; for this will decay within a few days and will be dissolved and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is observed that there is a high sound in the head and stomach, which causes pain to the patient, then be aware that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menstruation and childbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of iron or brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the fine point rest in the cone and the broader end over the flame, and the subtle smoke should be paused over the arms of the flame.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke is consumed, then repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the cure of the unpierced anus of an infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	These infants have anus that are not pierced, which are already slightly contracted and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And apply it over that wrapped cloth in wine and oil, and carefully prepare the ointment until it is cool.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it is blocked, insert a tube in the throat for several days, and stop when the child wants to spit it out.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that the filling of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a ulcer or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with the same remedies we have mentioned for healing and draining.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the healing of fistulas that have formed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that form in the perineum contain foul-smelling, thick pus, either protruding outward from or located in the space around the anus.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or multiple ones.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and affected by moist, white discharge or subtle putrefaction, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrations are made through what is seated in them for exit and ventilation; and sometimes the hernia uses the exit difficulty, and very strong it is seated in those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And so too are those fistulas some observed in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and so too are those penetrations into the joint of the thigh and into the root of the testicles.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the case where a fistula is penetrated into the anus and does not penetrate, you should insert the little-said endic into the anus, and then attempt with subtle effort to erode or pierce the fistula when it is not difficult.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is difficult in that case, then insert into that attempt subtle forceps or horsehair until you feel the attempt or hair on the little-said.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything from the whole body or have no cause for expulsion of worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now you are free for treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the discharge of urine from that place and prohibition from doing so until the affected area is strengthened by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the pain persists here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the surrounding areas; and it causes pus forever; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it strengthened by ointments.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure for those lies in the diligence and patience of skilled physicians on whom everything depends.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Perhaps the text means: "In those cases that are neither penetrating nor ancient, healing with fire is hoped for as you have been told, and what you have already experienced and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the illness moves between their legs over his sides and raises his legs within him; the parts are inclined towards his belly, then carefully insert a plug, or if it is in a twisted fistula, find the location where the attempt enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that place feels the illness around the heart, then you must insert your finger deeply into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the attempt in the chest already penetrating on its own, or if you feel anything between the chest and that flesh or bone, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and thus do not work there, for healing is not in that place, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they may say that it heals certain people suddenly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which one hopes for recovery in him, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adjacent to the fistula, which are similar to a quill of downy feathers, are properly adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then attend to those wounds wrapped in bandages until all those parts that are properly adjusted are healed, and apply remedies to the flesh that generate and solidify healing; if it is healed, it is good; otherwise, it will not be healed in any time through other treatments.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters, but does not penetrate into the inner part (the colon), and between that and the attempt, there is a thin layer of flesh or tissue, and the fistula is in such a way that it reaches the surface of the colon, then dry the colon from the beginning of the fistula, and watch for the drying of the attempt; when the attempt dries up, and the sectioning (of the colon) is complete at the place where the end of the attempt reaches, the attempt is freed and removed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those infected flesh that resemble veins, assembled together like a tube of some use, not ruptured by any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a discharge of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those meats, then take care that the best instrument to use is a cautery either by fire or by acute medicine, for a fire cautery ensures good healing: it adjusts those adherent meats and removes the pus by drying out the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then take care of those wrapped in calluses or three-sided damage within the affected area, and pay attention to the treatment of the wound by softening hard and infected flesh, generating and solidifying new tissue.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so, the medicines that involve stopping and cutting off; when it is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already permeated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you detect a growth that is hard and fleshy, between you and it there is clearly a risk of penetration, then it is not surgery for it but rather a matter of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for such a growth depends on three methods: either cauterizing it as we have said; or drying it out by reaching into the cavity that you create so that it is possible to apply the cure; and do not use any incisions because you would not be able to know the extent of the tear, and it could lead to further harm to the patient against their will; and take care of it as we have said for a strong healing; or elongate that tissue and clean out the pus that is in there close to the anus, as we have said, either by probing or another instrument with a very sharp point, and then clean those fistulated flesh with cauterization, if the opening of the fistula is not healed, and it ruptures again from inside the anus, it will become more painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the anus, then take the probe of the perforating end, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that wound wrapped in cloth or around those; then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is deeply inserted on the edge of the anus, then you extract the wound from that place and thus insert the probe into the anus; remove the end of the wound and align both ends, open each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you again insert the wound into the flesh, open it until those meats are opened between the two ends of the wound and they fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either by heat or by cold, as long as it is not harmful, and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharp at one end and the other part is not sharp, so as not to puncture what is unnecessary, thus avoiding it.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners, for they are either between the buttocks resembling as if they were of charcoal, or those are with a grainy rash.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the sanie flows from them at one time and is clear, and it is frequent, and comes out of its place, and affects the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are exclusively from the anus can be divided into a few types based on the degree of moisture, where there is a flow of citric water or a small amount of foul-smelling sanie continuously, and they are according to the body's color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is that you order the patient to lie down and press while the anus is still hot, so that the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you carefully place yourself over them or use what you have at hand, and cut open those parts to release the contents.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the cuts are not made in those parts for their moisture and softening, then use a coarse cloth or linen or a woolen cloth to extract them with your fingers, and afterwards incise them and sprinkle some powders over them after the incision, so that they adhere to the place instead of cauterization, or cauterize them as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then apply care to one and the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the hernia does not yield to expulsion, then crisp the malady with crisping in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with water that is on the skin and which prevents the hernia from coming out more easily when the malady squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with wax, and cut them, and then apply care to them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who perform the incision, know how to administer sutures for them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped around and pass it through the hemorrhoid in the parts above, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, and do it longitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stretching, and tie up the thread, and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do it thoroughly, leaving none untouched, so that the excess of the hot blood flows from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place the clean cloth soaked in hot oil or wax over the wound and press it down, and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that inside the wound; and when it becomes inflamed, treat those with ointments or other remedies until it heals.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Various complications arise due to the drying out of fissures or the narrowing caused by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when these become old and no longer respond to that medicine, you will need to clean those with the points of spatum or with your own ungla (possibly a medical tool) until they are moist and free from the pus that prevents their healing; which prohibits their union. And then treat them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enter, and be careful to tend to those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernia is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a red swelling in the body resembling a bone head, and it is felt throughout the body but mostly in the thighs and feet, and by those pains you should treat it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut what is in the ring of the hernia, either with scissors or a hook, and eradicate it from its place; and then tend to that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May a verruca be a small, rough, round ulcer protruding from the surface of the body, and spots are often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incision that, or to open it with a sharp tool or within a container.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical tools according to what we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they have been eradicated with the instrument that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May a tick be a small, hardened or round ulcer on the surface of the body, often accompanied by itching, and when it is disturbed, it feels like a mosquito bite around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a thin needle of goose or duck feather, and make it strong, and press it onto the swelling until it holds the circle of the needle; then turn your hand over the needle while you insert what is in the circuit of the swelling, and press it into the flesh, and eradicate the swelling from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part protruding from the needle should be delicate, smooth (not pierced), wrapped such that upon touching it, the patient's pain is alleviated and the rotation of that [part] is controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as mentioned above in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times ice is made from silver, or lead, or melted iron, and sometimes it is made from small or large instruments according to those used in administering treatment, for the instrument used to treat young children should be small; and of those that have cold or sore behinds, the ice of such should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few ice pieces:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the tube of it from above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and its distinction is where the bag is tied as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), following subtlety; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side a single channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, and the wider for a larger size.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be filled with medicines from animal bladder or sheep's skin, and its size be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with many things as it is twisted; and if the space between the parts is wide, use a larger one of these.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into these parts a strong, fresh tooth, or something similar; and attach the bag to them; and when the bag is secured in place, tighten it around the base of the patient's penis between two firm, thick structures, and then bind each part: The quality of binding these parts should be that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the patient's tolerance. And take care not to make it too tight or too loose.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then place the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them where it is comfortable for the man or on a lance; and apply the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it two times strongly until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the catheter and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with that throughout the night, it is more beneficial for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that applying heat to the pains of stomach solutions and vomiting helps it leave, then you use cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or fistulas in the anus that are painful, then use a gentle heat and cautery, as children use to treat them.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already spoken about the division of plague cures according to the season, and I have also said the cure for them with herbs and other medicines as appropriate.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place on which the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are thus: the weight of stone, or incision of space or of metal, or percussion with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those cause of sudden movement.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Plagues that are in the parts of the body may be thus: as plague which catches on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or back, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is recommended for the treatment of some plagues, to stop that reasoning and regulate regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple plague occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and the patient has already bitten their tongue and it is a severe plague, and you fear that the malady will lead to an apostema (infection), then immediately perform a cerebral flebotomy, without delay. Remove the blood from that part according to the amount of virtue in it, unless there is any other cause prohibiting flebotomy, especially if the abscess resulting from the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And conversely, flebotomy should be performed if there is an abscess in the opposite area of the affected part; and pay attention to the patient's condition regarding food intake and avoid heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If, however, there is no reason to avoid it due to the patient's age, then reduce their food intake and do not give them meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the plague, if it develops into an infected abscess, apply a compress of hot oil or wine in which spices have been steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the apoplexy's origin, rest on the affected area, if it is fresh and its wound has not been cleansed with water or air, then gently apply some dust to it again.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, rest on some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or it is due to an incision in a tight space and its edges do not meet properly, then adjust them with stitches as I have described regarding their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not a retention but a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the place of the tendon, and order the patient to abstain from food that is hard: seeds and forms of bread and similar things, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all the rotten parts and remove them, and then take care of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues involve an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not incised by medications, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should cut it with a knife or tie it off; and if cauterization needs to be performed after the abscess has been drained, do so.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so you should sprinkle on them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: mix equal parts of olive oil from broken seeds, dragon's blood oil from two parts, and unextinguishable smoke from three parts; grind it all finely and fill the plague with it, then tightly wrap it with good binding so that it adheres to that area and coagulates the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it with poultices and leave it, without loosening it while it is in that condition, as it will not be healed from him until the medicine is absorbed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times it requires only caution, when there is no acute pain or inflammation of the dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is performed on large abscesses when it is appropriate to drain them and tighten their surroundings, and they are recent wounds with fresh inflammation, whose air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has been altered, especially during summer, then one cannot understand the position of this powder, but instead, apply what we have said: place over these infected spots a mixture of egg yolks or, place over the pores of the flour from the order in water and honey until they are cured; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in the bone and it is small, then you extract it with your hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And now, I shall tell the cure for skull fractures that are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the colon.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the colon, it does not differ much in treatment, unlike the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the colon are cut, then if it is a nerve, treatment should not be forced but rather focus on preventing harm to it, as hot applications and similar substances that cause intense tightness, like vitriol, should be avoided as they cause damage to the nerves and constriction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuation reaches the brain, which is the source of all the body's functions.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If it is to be treated with lighter medicines, then wash it with water, sometimes with rose oil or not, and apply heat after washing with water and the other remedies in this manner, and moisten with humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is severe, then apply a stitch, or tighten the edges of it, and once it is healed, carefully remove the poultice.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the pain is deep or there is an abscess in it, then puncture it at the most painful spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the pain an artery is incised and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if that is necessary to prevent it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine has already been incised from the neck all the way down, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you should adjust the edges of the wound with sutures on the bone of the neck and do not touch it; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and tighten it with appropriate tension, leaving it for a few days; and then treat it with poultices where there is stiffness and inflammation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the infection has already taken hold in the bone, then probe it and if there are any fragments of bone, remove as many as you can; leave what is not infected until the plague has run its course, separating and expelling it from the body.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the infection is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the infection has caused a fistula, then treat it with the thing whose remembrance will come appropriately in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the symptoms of colds or similar conditions when pain strikes between the shoulders and is felt in space, or at the edge, or with a lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion with a lance or a sword, and the pain is deep, consider more seriously if the disease has a windy quality when the patient cries out; then know that the disease is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the pain is recent with a fever, then you should apply to it from the first hour with poultices, and do not squeeze it so that the fever does not become deeper and return to the patient, but rather apply attractive ointments, and clean it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you do not have the ointment, then apply a cold compress to the site of the pain so that it draws out what is in it from moisture; and make the patient sleep on the affected area so that the liquid flows where it should.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the disease has passed three days or more and no spasms, tremors of the heart, nor stiffness of the joints occur, and other good dispositions follow, then you know that the illness is safe; and from there, cure it with calgesic and other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the hernia is prolonged and remains open for a long time, then you know that a fistula has formed; so cure it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the disease is due to an incision of the space or joint, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with this: if it is large, use stitching, and if small, powder.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the disease has already affected the bone and you have already made an incision in the joint, then you should twist the hernia to extract the separated bones.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, leave them as they are until the pain subsides, for their removal is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental pains in the other members, the treatment from the beginning is what we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	On abdominal pains.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, or slight, or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For a great amount of swelling, the intestine or abdominal nerves are affected, so their insertion is made and the suturing of them is either very strong or very delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is clear that their reduction is more difficult if you do not insert them into their place immediately, as they open and become enlarged so that the insertion into them becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is by mid-position, for in that one there is no difficulty in reducing the hernia, as it is difficult in both of the aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that convenes in the sutures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures communicate with other diseases, but nevertheless, they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you an exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it says that when the disease is small and there is no cause of the hernia from within, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the scarcity of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia has been caused by inflammation of the air inside.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when this occurs, it is necessary that you wrap that which you submerge in a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water, or take water with lemon, vinegar, and spice, and apply it to the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, they use vinegar which has a drying effect, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, when you see that the inflammation is resolved, moisten the hernia with water containing aloe and marshmallow, for this alleviates the pain caused by it slightly.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the pain caused by it cannot be alleviated with this treatment, then cut open the obstruction with a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it involves neither cutting nor excessive drying and starving.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the sharp knife, and in another part not so sharp, and at the tip it should be slightly blunt, not too sharp like a spatula.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the hernia is enlarged and it has protruded, one must reduce it back to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible on top of it, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the rupture is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must elevate the patient's head and foot higher than the affected areas.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must always direct your intention and consideration towards making the affected part higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is that you must administer this in both great pains and milder pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in smaller pains, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine be administered between your patient's thighs, holding it with both hands, adjusting its lips, and gradually uncovering from one area to another to see if any cause for the rupture lies elsewhere.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it from the extremity of the rupture on the said finger, and tighten the needle once; be sure not to pass through both extremities of the string at once, but rather, from one opening to another, so that it penetrates from inside. And you have already added both extremities of the string and both extremities of the phalanx, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten the thread double around the needle, and sometimes from both sides together, and add both lips and the wound by a decent addition; and then reduce the thickness of this one and fix another needle into it, and bind that as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the thin needles enter the flesh slightly, while the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound; therefore, it is necessary that they be both thin and fine in thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should be noted that the needle is inserted into both ends of the wound gently, so that the flesh is not cut deeply and the wound opens up before its healing is complete.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures should not be too long, so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so as not to harm the patient during their sleep; place pillows on either side of the wound, with the ends of the needles extending from them; and leave them there until you know that the injury is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of sutures with needles are most convenient for small wounds, where one or two needles or even more can be used in the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second type of suture is as follows: and it is that you administer a suture to all four ends, from the coccyx and two extremities of the thigh, at once, with a needle in which silk or other thread is tightly wrapped, both in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle to its original path from which it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, making the suture like a second layer of cloth with which the wounds are tightly bound.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, apply the quantity of the thickest part of the bandage to it.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch heals men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I have treated the disease that had afflicted a man in his belly, where a knife had caused a wound about the size of a palm, and it was the disruption of the main plague in the middle of the body; and then I have reduced the swelling around the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed in about fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and that man recovered and has been well for many years, and this method is practiced by most people.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by a miracle, for you did not treat it with any ointment or medicine, but only applied heat to the wound two or three times a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of suture according to the account of the word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin to sew from the back, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore, as the needle penetrates into the flesh and at the junction, according to its rectitude and length throughout the body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; then make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside through the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the first penetration, make another penetration in that same end of the wound from inside to outside; then leave the end of the thread on this side, and insert the needle into the other end of the opening from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make a penetration with that penetration which causes penetration into the flesh at the end of the sight, which is in the opening of him so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin at this point on the side of the body and take that with the end which is from the flesh on the other side, remove the needle from the thread, and return it to that thread and to the end of the flesh which is on the other side compared to this end of the sight; remove that from the thread which is part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once, and then another time, and continue doing this until you have closed everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this method of stitching is that you stitch with a skin suture, such as stitching the flesh, once from the side of the end of the thread, and then turn it over until it is completely closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second specific type of suture that is most effectively used by doctors, which they call 'Galia', involves stitching with certain thread-like substances that some physicians use, thereby adding to its strength relative to its natural state; and then applying one end of it to one extreme of the wound and the other end to the opposite extreme, and this is done according to your prescription.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Ensure that you hold the needle at the end of the mirror, aiming towards your own body, and make it penetrate from outside into the inside of the wound, passing through both ends of the hernia; then turn around the needle and make it penetrate from inside out, going through both ends of the hernia.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn around those threads and make some of them penetrate from inside out into the wound, passing through both ends of the mirror other than the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which one has previously had memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they may say to you, "Suture the belly with two needles; so enter into these as you wish, and begin to insert the needle from which it is your duty, and make that penetrate between the other sides according to the suture of those whose hearts are bound together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which is because when you perceive the recent plague in front of its ulcer that the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew it and fit it properly, then pause over that powdery flesh.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply heat to that area with hot compresses until the pain subsides and the swelling goes down, and it becomes healed and remarkable; and then treat that wound as one would treat other wounds until they heal.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have access to medicines, then focus on these measures: apply heat and cold alternatively, several times a day, as taught to you, until it heals, for you should not need other medications or complex arrangements when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound might communicate with other vital parts, then cover it with a cloth dipped in high-quality oil or melted oil, and place it around the area between the angles and leave the bandages on.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your bowels, several times a day, when this occurs, apply a compress of black stippling herb, especially if the abscess is advanced in the bowel and there is discharge penetrating into the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that hernias of greater size are more easily healed than those in the smaller cavities.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing for the hernia which is called "gunnu" because it does not receive cure from any plague; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, the magnitude of them, the subtlety of the body of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If it is that you treat the plague with cloth and succeed in making it recent, reduce it according to your established method, which reduces hernias equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has spread to the space and is already red or black, then you should tighten the thread over the area that is discolored, so that pus flows out, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise this other matter, and place two extremities of the thread pendant on either side of the wound, so that by removing the cloth and releasing the pressure from the plague's arm, the attraction is alleviated.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it in some people, so you should pay attention to those who have been plagued by it in their abdomen through the piercing of lances, and they had an ancient plague with a fistula, and treatment involved management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the cure for it as if it were not confirmed in its healing, but rather seek to subtilize the part that ignites health and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having observed the place already consolidated, consider the disease that you are suffering from in your stomach; and do not give way to any further such misfortune, breaking all his healthy dispositions in eating and drinking, and then immerse yourself in water and exercise according to its dictates.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when the hernia is small, it should be treated in this manner: you take pliers with large jaws; then adjust both lips of the hernia and place a clamp over both lips from those that keep the mouth open; therefore, when you grasp those and tighten your mouth, cut off the cap, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another clamp near the first one, and do not stop making clamps as many as needed for the whole hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce it and bring the hernia back to its place; cut off those attached caps within the abdomen until the hernia is healed; and cause no further harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia is lined with a very thin thread made from the hernia of an animal, which is finer than a needle; so take the end of these hernia threads, make them quite bare, and attach the end of them to a thread, wrap it, and insert that thread into the hernia, and reduce it to its opening.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle hernias, then it requires subtlety, not just a remedy, for its cure.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every ulcer and fistula, when they age and become old, and are not healed and get infected for a long time and do not heal, is generally called a fistula in any member, and we call it that ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to truth, is a fluid-filled, hard, white structure that causes no pain and has a hollow shape just like the one caused by external injury; for this reason, it is called acute pain, i.e., suffering.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some people a moist condition, which turns red, and the moisture is evacuated in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is excessive, and at other times it is scant, and sometimes it is thin, and other times it is thick.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already mentioned this in the previous section when describing ulcers, stating that any wound that does not heal or is not in bare flesh is due to one of these causes: either due to a lack of blood circulation in the body; or malice within it; or because there is hard, prohibitive tissue between it and the lips; or it is of excessive weight; or because the ulcer itself becomes putrid and the matter that passes through it is of bad quality; or because the treatment for it is inappropriate; or when corruption takes hold in a region and there is pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, as is the case in Zaragoza, where difficult digestion of ailments occurs and healing from abscesses is slow by nature; or if there is bone involved, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It has already shown all those causes, the signs of those, and their cure through medicines in detail.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And also, know that is how you should treat a fistula caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skull, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal bones of the back, or any of the joints composed as is the hand and foot; and those give to it a proximity to the main member and similarly.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas, those that are of this nature are of the most difficult to heal diseases, and do not receive treatment, and their occupation is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is a fissure that is so deep that it does not reach these places which are mentioned, wait and have faith in its healing, and want to come to know it, then try to pull or cut it, and if the fissure is according to rectitude, question that part of it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fissure is twisted, then investigate that part with a delicate probe, for the weight of their body, lifted and curved due to the twist, must be straightened to cure the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fissure is causing extremely horrible pain, it is not within your power to probe or question it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you cleanse that one must also affect the other orifices and correct them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you must inquire very carefully, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the indentation of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula that only causes horrible pain and is entirely within the realm of your strength, with which you question the illness, and the discovery of the pain through your compression with your hand over the area, and similar signs of accidents in the region of the wound.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will see the cure according to your knowledge: for you now consider whether it is a fistula near or distant from the joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places that you know it to be in.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now examine the fistula according to the description given of its location, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and what has formed in the opening of the flesh or from parts like it, and cure that as it heals.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rules, then you should incise it in the place most accessible to you and clean it of all corrupt flesh; and then apply some lint wrapped in sharp medicine, and insert those into the hollow of the fistula, which you have understood with your finger.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this because, in some cases, acute medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then, after healing, apply ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed with this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must prove this, then examine it and dry it as we have recommended; however, do not prohibit any cause from veins or nerves or major limbs, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then clean it until the corruption is completely gone; and then apply care to that with something that promotes healing.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the pain and inflammation do not subside and dissipate as it should, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you must delve into it again carefully and precisely examine its cause and purification with the last remaining strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it is healed, it is good; but if not, you will know that the corruption is in the deep parts of the body, which has not reached, and so for you there remains only to cleanse that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small, it may be removed by you using delicate forceps suitable for such work.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, carefully remove all of them, leaving none due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If something causes you difficulty due to humidity, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then cut through those bindings or flesh if they exist, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have the skill to remove the bones from your patient, then apply pressure over the sore area until the pain subsides, and leave it thus until it is surrounded by flesh and ligaments, and guard against a hardening of the wound that you have incised during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Habitually, if you are fearful, apply pressure to the area immersed in hot oil, or immersed in Egyptian alum, or any of the green alkalies, for when those ligaments soften, and the bones can be separated from their attachment, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as of the thigh or hip or similar, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then quickly apply compression only behind that until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted of it is a great fracture, and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close that wound completely by incision in the area where the corruption has occurred, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to enter into his thigh to hold it in place and serve as an assistant for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old experiences pain in his thigh, and upon examining inside, the problem is found to be related to matter within the body reaching the thigh, which becomes abscessed or a severe abscess, and not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the condition of the patient extends over time due to the mistakes of doctors, as the abscess becomes severe, and pus-filled matter comes out from it. His treatment is paused until the leg is fistulated, and openings are made on the infected parts which cause pain and lead to body waste and moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after this, the treatment of many doctors lasts for about two years, and they focus not on the knowledge but on the art, as I have been called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the patient's leg and the materials that were flowing from it through these orifices by great pain; and already the condition of that man was entirely stabilized and the color of him was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the probe into one of those orifices and succeed in penetrating the probe into the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then examine all the orifices and discover what causes these issues from every part of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you carefully cut and incise over one of those orifices until you discover a part of the bone, and find that it is rotten, hardened, and deteriorated; and already a part of the leg within which you had penetrated was corrupt, hard, and putrid.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then secure what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you should consider that it is not the bone but that corruption which needs to be removed and cauterized, and you had already dissected it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then, after pausing the restoration of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then, you should iterate and expose again over the bone secondarily according to the initial discovery, and seek continued corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And you should cauterize what appears to me as that corruption, and then you had made it pierced to make the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then, you should discover it again and do not proceed to cut the bone into small pieces, but pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you remove a part of it around a palm, and extract that from its marrow, and then restore it with medicine, which is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no further incision or section of the hernia is required unless for the purpose of arranging its folds and due to the patient's lack of endurance and fear of death, as it suffers in all hours from excessive evacuation leading to fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed entirely by nature, and nothing takes the place of bone or hard flesh; its arrangement in the body is good, and its virtue returns; it adjusts itself to its dispositions, and causes no discomfort during walking or harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If a bone protrudes from the body, you must proceed as follows: take a strong bandage and wrap it around the end of that protruding bone, asking someone to extend it; then place another bandage, thicker than the first one, over the flesh left by the bone; and next, tie this over the flesh you wish to cut, extending the end so that you uncover the flesh where you want to make the incision, without damaging the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And then place a plank or table under the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And take care that the sawing over the corrupt place is done little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the corrupted bone and does not appear on the surface when touching, then force the saw again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is a continuous break from one side to another, and the corruption is in the middle or at its beginning, then you must expose the flesh from all parts; and place a plank underneath, and saw first the broken part where the corruption has entered, until the sawing of the other part is completed.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in a joint, incise that corrupt joint, and close the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in a rational way but ingeniously.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire into the corruption as it appears to you, open that up, and remove it according to any disposition possible for you, and ingeniously correct whatever remains so that no veins or nerves are affected.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know what kind of knives and saws are suitable for cutting these bones, depending on the placement of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and their subtlety and size and rarity, and the hardness of them; so it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation signifies to you regarding the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways of ill health, then you will already have for yourself what is suitable for it among all instruments for any illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will be taught the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your practice, the very same ones that you will apply to your limitations, and which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the form of a star-shaped key, and its points are in the shape of spikes.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not advisable to apply this unless the joints' heads are rubbed when they are corrupt or if the mouth is widely opened.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the larger scalpel compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the smaller scalpel:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of the broad scalpel:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved on one side and have the edge of steel sharp, and the limb of it shaped like a gentle bayonet.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The form of the scalpel with a concave shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The form of another very sharp scalpel:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The form of another scalpel with an extremely curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The form of a small scalpel resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of the chisel-like instrument that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The form of another smaller chisel-like instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another chisel-like instrument; this one resembling a ray, with a sawtooth tip, and used in various locations for cutting bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray that is suitable for reason of him who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and in a way that all the causes we have mentioned about razors, scissors, and saws are covered.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremity and of the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if the treatment you have administered for that corruption does not bring relief, and the corruption continues to progress until it affects a member which is not struck by any cause, then know that you must make an incision in that member within this place where the malady has its origin, so that the disease may be relieved from death or severe damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black within, while it is still covered by skin, or if you can see the blackness within, to that part of the member which has been affected and takes hold of the entire body; and thus make an incision on that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain venomous sources such as a scorpion's sting or that of a viper or nettle and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the thumb of the hand.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you replace it, then incise the arm into the shoulder at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and the environment of the shoulder changes, then that is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause for this in healing is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, for a foot corruption, if you replace the aforementioned foot, then you incise it into one of the nuts.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot's edge, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter within the toe, then you incise the leg into the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then in it there is no other remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament in the place where you want to cut, and tighten another ligament over the area; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without making a large gap so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it should be covered with clean linen from all sides so that it does not touch the wound, and the patient's injury should be adjusted and treated carefully.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the operation, you should cauterize the area carefully or apply some powders to constrict the blood flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member to a suitable ligament, and treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And now I present the translation of the provided sentence: "And I advise you to attend to a man on his foot, this unexpected accident that you and I have recommended, which occurred due to the darkening of his foot by an adjustment that resembled the burn of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurred first in the inner part of his foot, which tends to affect the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for this treatment, as he saw the cure advancing to the member with the violence of his pain and the heat of the fire, and he incised that foot at the joint, and the fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that treatment caused this corruption on the inside of the foot, as indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it occurred to me, and I realized that this excess should be countered with a method that stops the body's corruption, so I applied purification to his body; and the excess did not recur, and we began to move to the other inner part of the foot where we had started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor asks me to cut the patient's hand, and he does not want to do this hoping for the repulsion of that superfluity, rather you must hold firm the incision of the patient's dead hand, for the virtue of the disease was in its sudden onset.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and forced me to prepare and cut the hand of that man entirely, and he is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this narrative merely to provide aid regarding this illness, but also to explain its cause and meaning, and according to which it is understood and treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of wounds and the quality of enema therapies with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess extends to form a collection of pus, then it is cut open and drained, and the pus is let out from it, leaving the area hollowed out as if it were a pipe. The skin over it remains intact, and there is no subsequent corruption, and it does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments; this is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Nevertheless, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption completely involves a member, it is called a fistula and does not heal.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is that you cut open that entire duct as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with a knife, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the duct will adhere and that that corruption will not succeed through further consequence, and if the duct has opened from front, then treat it with a cleanse.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the arm that they affect has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and spices, mixed in a vessel, heated over fire until the medicine becomes steamy and reaches a specific temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash the affected sinus with a clister, tighten the orifices of the intestine, and leave the medicine within for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that foul matter; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the pain relieved.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, enema with ashes of vite (a plant) can be used as an alternative when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes of vite and mix it with water; then apply that and wash the affected area with a clister until you confirm that the sinus has been relieved.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash the affected area with a clister of honey and water mixed with third of triquet (a traditional measurement), or with wine and honey mixed, for honey has purifying properties and washes, while wine helps adhere the mixture to the sinus, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, cleanse that part with water which causes the flesh to be born in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you take a mixture of vinegar and dissolve that oily substance and apply it with astringent; or you clean that part with some medicines mixed with oil, as I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the swelling are tight and do not allow the enema tube to pass, gradually widen them with a small iron, and place warm water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until they are widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices seem wide enough, then you should remove the stitches around them and leave them open for the amount that is necessary for the enema to be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice through which the arm passes is elevated above its attachment, dry that part in the deepest location within it so that the arm flows freely inside, for when the arm is compressed in the depth of its socket, flesh grows within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the socket within the deepest location around the bone as you wish, then perforate and prepare the member so that the arm can flow out of it lightly according to what you have prepared and without any cause for retention by the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied over the socket, appropriately mixed with cloth from him.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers the entire socket; then, using scissors, cut them at the right angle to the orifice of the socket slightly wider than the orifice itself; and extend another piece of cloth soaked in ointment over it according to the size of the opening, and place it over there at a distance from the orifice so that the arm's excretion is prevented from entering and the cloth is not too large but remains for about two days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is above the wound of the sinew, which pulls at all times so that it draws what is attached to it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus, consider the location of that sinew, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is any abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been thrown onto the wound of the sinew has adhered, or a strong adhesion formed, on certain days you loosen it, and when you remove the plague, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If it is a sinew that has created a long, thin space, do not be discouraged by the adhesion of it, for healing to itself takes place, for there are certain people in whom the growth of flesh occurs in their wounds after a long time, and others in whom the opposite happens.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if an indigest brash of the sinew has been present for several days, you will know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinew is prolonged and it is the cause of continued discomfort, then adjust in the scarcity of medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be dried as with a drying agent, when there is an abundance of superfluity added for protection.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last remedy, which is used for its curative properties, is to take a drying agent and dissolve it in warm oil, and apply it over the affected area, just as if it were another substance, and then wrap it up and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to act in the same way when there is no brash, take a drying agent, honey that is thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, boil them, grind them into a powder over fire, wrap it in cloth, and press it onto the sinew; and use the honey that you have observed to be thick, grind it into cloth, and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times they administer to him long and thin pieces of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies), and henna flour and centaury, and use those simples either fresh or dried, crush them and sieve them and sprinkle the powder over honey which has been collected; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain persists and does not improve with this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the joints of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of bruises and sore nails, adding cuts to the finger and making an incision.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici (bruises) is an apostema (inflammation) that results from the nail of the finger or toe becoming detached, and it can also affect other digits. When prolonged, its treatment becomes more complex, either with a cauterization (apostemat caut) or corrosion (corrumput), causing a bitter smell to emanate. The extreme end of the affected digit darkens in color.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have dealt with what we have mentioned in the previous section and do not apply your treatment, then cut off with iron all the excess that is adhering to the nail and cauterize the wound nearby, for cautery brings relief to it.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the excess of the nail already penetrates into the flesh and begins to puncture and harm it, then stop the pain by making a subtle cut at the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, push it away and cut that flesh easily, and apply over it medications with corrosive-burning herbs until all the flesh is completely healed; then care for it with poultices until it is cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then cut out the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing where the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe corrosion and destruction in the area, you will incise it into one of the joints according to the memory of its pain, and then treat it so that it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is necessary percussion or incision on the finger due to severe pain, then at the beginning of the treatment, you should cut off the diseased part with a sharp and clean knife in a transverse manner from above, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh that remains on the finger, because otherwise, you will cause the patient severe pain, and it can lead to the growth of excess scar tissue at the site; then treat the area so that the pain subsides.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this condition, which is born in the flesh of many people, is either entirely cartilaginous, or it contains a lot of bone, or it is very hard in the fingers.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate in the stiffness of the joint, or it is the nature of them in certain joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born in ignorance of this knowledge will not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints will be afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is shallow, for you must insert the blade slightly into their flesh.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	For he who is born with the condition in the joint, treatment is difficult; therefore, beware of the excision of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born with such a condition in these areas, you must begin by inserting the knife at the start, cutting into their flesh with a circular motion within the bone, and then close it with one of those suitable saws, and take care that it heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Similarly, consolidation that occurs between the joints due to frequent use or by nature in a person who lacks such knowledge, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar, you must remove that consolidation so the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets some linen soaked in warm oil so that they are not quickly consolidated, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until it is solidified according to need.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if similar consolidation occurs in certain parts of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the incision of veins, there arise varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins, when they are damaged, become varicose veins, which are thick, rolled-up veins filled with melancholic superfluity, which occur in most parts of the body, especially in the legs, particularly in those who walk a lot, work hard, and carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary that you induce purging of the body from black choler at times with strong expulsion, and draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their pain is by two methods: one is to incise and drain that black pus, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick pus is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then the leg of the patient is tightly bound at the infected area above the purulent pus with a bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places with wide incisions, and the black pus is raised with the dominant hand from the infected area below the leg until all the desired amount is drained, as much as needed to alleviate the patient's condition.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it tightly, and order the patient to abstain from spicy foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	However, the elevation of their limbs should be done in this manner: if you are cleaning the patient's leg, and it is covered in hair, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with lukewarm water until it becomes numb and the veins stand out; or if it has been exercised vigorously, then wash it with cold water until the limb is cooled.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then tie the string around the vein at the right of its course, cutting it either near the surface or deep within, depending on where it is most painful, or at the very bottom if it is least painful.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then loosen the string with scissors and cut the vein from all sides until it stops pulsing, and observe the color of the vein; if it turns darker, it indicates that the disease is declining.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And once you have removed the string and the vein, examine the white part of it to see if any cord remains.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert the instrument into the space that it is elevated and freed from the cord, and suspend it with a weight of some kind.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut at a distance of three fingers from the first, and carefully separate the cord from the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then elevate that one and incise it in the posterior section, close to the talus, and extract it, raising it until it passes through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section among all of them, ensuring that they are all removed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not adhere to extracting and raising it, then insert a strong double-ended needle and tie it, and extract it, or insert the instrument into the space and turn your hand over until it is completely freed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut yourself; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and it will come back against the wound causing further harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is removed, you will place over the affected area a mixture of water and oils, both fragrant and unfragrant, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting or entanglement, and it is not in its normal position as we have said, you will make a cut over all of its twists and at the sites where it is entangled, and then suspend it until it lifts entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein and avoid damaging it, for it will be difficult to raise it; and use your discretion in that regard.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which should be treated:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of the wound:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not cut too sharply as with wounds, nor does it have an acute edge so that it does not harm the vein; instead, it has great flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; thus, it has a sufficient thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the removal of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the hernia on Arabic land and in the rear and arid lands of India with little greenery or openness.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And moreover, the vein is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of decomposition is such that it causes pus to come out from within the body, snakes and worms, and parasites that are born between the fester and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the onset of gout is that a violent inflammation occurs in the leg; then the area becomes swollen; and shortly after, the vein begins to leave the affected area, which seems to be torn from within, like a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the onset of gout becomes apparent, you will notice that you must wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is equal to that of a dragon. Within this dragon, put the affected area and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever you see any cause for gout to occur outside of the body, wrap it in lead and note this.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, you make an incision into it and wrap the wound; do not dig deeply with a knife unless it has come to the surface, for if you dig too deep, it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing abscesses and gangrene in the area, and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it is important that the growth be treated gradually and extracted little by little, until it has completely come out from the body, without leaving any cause for its return within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have reported that it extends to the length of their palm and fingers, and I myself have witnessed one case where it extended for 10 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if an incision is made during treatment, you insert the ray into the channel of it and perforate that deep channel in the flesh, so that all that is within the matter may be evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days using medicines; then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is sometimes seen with great swelling, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes great pain, and it emanates from each painful point.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and pay attention to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine inflammation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called bovine fever in some countries because it causes great pain in the cows and a few worms are found between the intestines and flesh, which enter the whole body, causing swelling and destruction, and their symptoms are most evident when they break the intestines and push them out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of this disease is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which causes worms and serpents and roundworms and ascariasis in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the blood, then severely breaks and destroys the blood vessels, and this should be treated with care.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you wish to cure and extract it, you must not do so unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what remains below it with strong compression, and dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery at the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is its corruption, which also corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it has reached the head near the blood vessels, then grasp the upper eyelid with strong compression, and dry it, and extract that. And take care that this malady uses purification of the body by medicines that expel putrid bad humors, and be cautious of foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the incision above the disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a female patient in a village, and upon discovering her arm, you saw a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which had been broken for an hour. As it was being examined, this inflammation seemed to spread, almost like living silver as it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then they removed the pain from that place and applied pressure to the muscle, and held it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct the other body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I noticed that I had to revolve myself in every part of the body as I had seen; and it was too amazing from the permutation of it and the speed of its members.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my feet according to that manner, however I have seen many which shock with pain being permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen this in the feet like on a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think that this was anything but that it was because the woman was crippled, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this condition, the sensation of that permuted air appeared.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retro-cures not be apparent in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with narrowed veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you wish to cure him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent as we have said, tighten over that and let him lie lightly and dry on that until the air circulation is restored, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you cannot find them in your feet, then cure that by relieving the body and removing the air circulation, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and serpentine pills.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and according to the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, or dull, being solid; and some have three angles, or tongues, or are saw-toothed.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts where it strikes, it acts in two ways: for the principal members, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, ribs, bladders, and their like, when it attacks any of these members and signals your impending death, which cause I will relate below, you must then avoid extraction of that arrow from those parts where death is that member in which the worst conditions occur, and when these malaises do not appear, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract that one and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of severe illness is when an arrow strikes in it and penetrates the bone, especially the one above the brain, due to violent heat, and causes scotomies, vertigo, pain in the legs, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, and mixing up of speech, vomiting of bile, and a strong loss of words, and destruction of the voice, and leaves at the site of the illness a white humidity resembling powder, and it has characteristics similar to those of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these symptoms appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the arrow enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel a sudden, severe pain, not visible from the outside, and strongly perceive the movement of the arrow as similar to the pulse and the flow of black blood, and there is a coldness in the extremities, shortness of breath, and fainting; then know that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus from the plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are affected, and the patient's condition changes, breathing heavily and requesting fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane in the foot, and the pain is localized to the small ribs, it causes intense pain and heavy breathing, and all the muscles of the body are greatly affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if an arrow strikes the stomach, it will immediately alleviate the pain of any undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes stuck in it, causing a tear or rupture of the organ, whether it be the gut or hernia, there is little hope for its healing through removal of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and causes it to release urine outside, resulting in any discharge due to its impact, and intense pain grips the patient, then you should know that it is a fatal wound.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members, such as the face, neck, head, shoulders, elbow, hip, thigh, leg, and similar parts of the limbs, can be saved with careful handling when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a venomous dart.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand their application in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal bone of a man's eye in the root of his nose and it is extracted from him on another day, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, then he recovers, and there is no injury to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the grays of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of striking a lion without leaving an auricle.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no further damage to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into his throat, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one with feathers; and then I incised between two guides, and it was already submerged in the man's throat; and then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and I realized that he was dying from it; so, after we had passed thirty days and nothing had changed regarding the state of his organs, I incised onto the arrow and manipulated it, and thus he was healed, without any further complications.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had stuck in his back, and the pain was concentrated on him, and after applying heat for some time, I pulled out the arrow at the base of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had an arrow stuck in her belly, and the pain was deep inside her, and it did not change with any of her organs' functions, and the woman suffered no severe disruption of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man to whom an arrow has struck his face, the wound is deep and the arrow breaks, causing little pain but many similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the face of the prince of the king who had been struck in the middle part of his nose and had already bent to the right a little; the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the treatment of him, soon after the arrow's wounding, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then he carefully examined the wound of the arrow, and found it deep; then he sought that subtle attempt, and did not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain leaving the right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was from the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	He then applied a plaster to the place with a drawing and digestive effect, hoping that by doing so he would draw out the arrow from that place.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not open in the place of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply poultice over it for several days, and no further injury occurs; and as the plague solidifies between them, break up the obstruction from the opening by intervals of several days until on one day you feel the arrow within its neck and reconnect it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then stop over the injury with a sharp corrosive medicine for several days until a wound opens, and try to soothe it, and cut off the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I see visibly the tip of the arrow, and spend time on it for intervals of time up to four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then I made the wound more enlarged, and I managed to insert forks into it, and maintained them, and did not give up trying, when suddenly one day through ingenious ways I managed to take hold of it with forceps, as will be the form of those in the end of the chapter, until I removed that; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and they restored it so that the disease was consolidated and the illness was healed entirely, without any recurrence.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows in order to give this rule and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood from the narration, nor can one comprehend those in the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans speak little about what is present, and much more about what is absent; and they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes from the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not extruded from the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they intertwine; or conversely, from the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding through fleshy parts, and is thrown out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, soon you will leave it for a few days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it and its exit are relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it becomes lodged in the bones and you do not adhere to eating times, leave it for a few days until it relieves itself of attraction and motion on certain days, and then it will be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your diet for a few days, soon you will puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle journey until the location is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the skull bone and has pierced one of the brain's cavities, and symptoms of those injuries appear, do not extract the arrow immediately but leave it until its presence is balanced by some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the brain, and the patient recovers after some days without any complications from those injuries, then use your ingenuity to remove the arrow and its attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and resists extraction, then administer treatments along the arrow's path as we have recommended, and carefully care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body but stuck in place, and it is causing pain, then investigate its attachment, and if you feel any resistance, apply some sharp objects to its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then cut into the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached to it, which should be removed entirely, then cut through the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides using every means at your disposal; and devise a way, if you cannot remove the flesh from around the torn auricles and their twisting, until they heal.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use your hand's torsion with forceps from all sides until it tightens; and with subtlety and the utmost care to prevent the arrow from breaking, and successfully extract it along with the wound.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it with your tools, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the wound's area decreases, and then try again when the pain has subsided.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience difficulty due to bleeding, then administer what we have mentioned for treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And take care to cut the vein or nerve, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by your physician.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrowhead in such a way that the injury is according to the figure by which you aim to hit the target of the arrow, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Also, the arrows that are shot against the opposite side or have already struck any part on the outside of the body, or whose tip shows signs of bending due to the pressure from below and above the skin, you should remove it; and hold it with pincers, if necessary, according to the amount they take up; then shoot it away, for it is made lighter by impact.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the direction that the arrow penetrates into the bone, amplifying the cut and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not help after several days, then repeat the process as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is within the bone, then you push it towards the opening.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft has fallen and you want to give a thrust, then insert a pointed instrument, if it is hard, strike it sharply into the concave part of the bone where the arrowhead is located, and push it towards the opening.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the instrument, as the arrowhead will be guided away by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is embedded, you must press all your weight into the flesh where it is truly stuck, if possible, and take care of that area as best you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is near enough that you can feel it, and if it is possible to extract it without causing injury to veins or nerves, then extract it and treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Design of forceps for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a serrated edge to grasp the arrow firmly so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, large, small, and medium, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness, its fragility, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of driving out the concave end with pain from outside so that the arrow's intrusion is removed from it, and pushing from that side.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of driving out the stiff end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that it is driven out from the concave arrow and pushed towards that side.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venipuncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for flebotomy, of which there are several, include: two pulsatile veins near the auricles, called the temporal arteries; two veins in each eyebrow, known as the lacrimal ducts; a vein located in the middle part of the forehead and one at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the nape of the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two on the lower lip; these are called the alare veins; and finally, two veins on the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are flebotomized in the arms; for from them comes a cephalic vein, and it is necessary to use wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and also "the deaf one," and it is the median vein, composed of a branch of the basilic and another branch of the cephalic; and the people call it "the vein of the whole body," the basilic vein which is paused in the domestic armpit is called "citular," and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, paused on the fossa, is the one where flebotomy is performed, and is the one that appears on the skin through manifest appearance; and the saveola, which is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, is only two branches deep.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the end of the wild lettuce; the second is superficial, and its location is left at the cuff of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, whose place is left at the cuff of the wild lettuce; and in the cuff there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is for old catarrh, emaciation, scurf and ulcers on the head, ancient evil conditions.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those veins depends on what you have learned: it should be done at the base of the patient's head, and rub the patient's head on the occiput at the place where both veins are located close to their auricles with a good friction; tighten the bandage around the patient's head so that both appear and the locations where their auricles are firmly pressed in two parts from the head; and if you want to follow this method, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as described above, do it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the scalpel, one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the fluotomy reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand over the vein and bone, and cut into the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as needed; and cut through the flesh as deeply as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply strong compresses and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And as mentioned at the beginning of this text, the incision and cauterization of these are to be done.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are located on the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and serious evil, leading to frequent headaches and acute overflowing of fluids in the joints.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing a phlebotomy on these is as follows: compress the patient's neck until two veins appear by visible evidence and confirm the pulse below them, and then you should proceed cautiously.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, raise the cord over the vein as indicated by your finger, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument beneath it, and elevate the vein; cut through it in the same way you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then, close the incision of the patient's hernia, place your finger over the vein for an hour, apply pressure to that side and moisten it with a poultice, and tighten it firmly until it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now, having preceded the recollection of them, and those of their incisions, attract them to the beginning of the opening.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate for ancient face diseases, migraines, and putrid wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy is according to what you have learned; so that the disease tightens its collar with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a phleatome, which has this form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the point at the prominent end of the phleatome on that vein and strike it with a gentle or other appropriate motion in the manner of the instrument, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's disease and tighten it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, the phlebotomy is opened widely, but it is not appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of extreme acuteness as with other phlebotomies, but rather of a lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strong, it would easily break during the delicate phlebotomy.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the juices of the two veins that are the tears of both eyes due to itching and irritation in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the vein in one place, and then you make a phlebotomy there, while standing over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a little bit of phlebotomy, for in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then only the tip of it should be cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then allow the bleeding to continue as much as is necessary, and press on those parts, tighten them for a night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is useful for acute fever and violent chills, and for facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that the illness tightens its grip and you take his nose with your left hand, and make a subtle long phlebotomy at the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not hurt in this place, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Be sure to carefully clean your hand with water and soap before touching the patient, since unclean hands can cause further infections. Endure slowly your fingers in the flebotomy, allowing the blood to flow according to your need; then tie it off tightly for a night, as the wound will heal more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	After the flebotomy, both openings should be tightly bound to prevent blood loss and facilitate the beginning of healing, as well as combat infections, inflammation, and aggressive or corrosive ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The effectiveness of the flebotomy lies in that it draws out the illness from each part of the body; the healer should be positioned at the head of the patient, and the patient should lie on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then, make a small but deep flebotomy in the vein of the limb, removing blood according to its volume or as much as necessary; then close it with a bandage similar to that of the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then carefully loosen the ligament and tighten both veins with moderate pressure to prevent further inflammation, and leave it within the bandage until the pain is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the surgical incision of the veins, it deals with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers on the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of this surgical procedure is that it stops the disease in its track and tightens its hold with a bandage, then turns the lip edges inside out and examines both veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each one is identified by the darkness of both, especially so around those areas where smaller veins are present. Then incise each one with a precise cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If doubt still persists, and you do not know which one it is, then understand that you should proceed to incision of the larger one among them, and remove any visible pus from those areas.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it look like the two veins that are on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is often necessary to cut both veins that are on the patient's lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	When both veins that are on the tongue are involved, it is appropriate to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal parts, which are in the throat, as well as for conditions of the uvula and oral cavity.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomy is such that it follows the disease among your fingers in front of the sun, lifts the tongue, and observes beneath the tongue, from one side where the vein is and from the other side, and the color of each changes to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to end up with your hand in phlebotomy of those, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are phlebotomized in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is performed in two ways, either by applying a phlebotomizing needle with a drop of myrtle or olive oil, or by making a cut with a phlebotomizing knife, and it is called arteriotomie, and this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for section, and they are special knives of various thicknesses according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Both the thickness of it [the myrtle] and its length, and it is used to open the concave veins full of thick, clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this fluctometry is of smaller extent and has more subtle endings, suitable for fluctometries of delicate veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the juvenation of the fluctometry of the basil vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the maladies that are left in the gullet and intestines, and from this, the feet and belly are healed.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the fluctometrist, when performing that fluctometry, to preserve that and be wary of it, because it has an artery, and if he err and misplace the puncture of the fluctometry, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to fluctometize that part with a sharp fluctometry, but rather cut it with alnessil.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basil vein does not appear by manifest appearance, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to another, or seek some of its branches; or fluctometize in the place where it ends in the arm, because that is manifest; and you must incise that one with alnessil as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, first cover the stricture of the arm you will be using, and locate the spot within it where the pulse is felt; then press down upon it tightly; bring the arm close, and with a sharp cut make a flebotomy on the concave vein; and be careful to avoid striking the artery in any space of the location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, and strengthen the ligament, there appears an inflation in the spot that you have pressed tightly; that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore you should avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the flow of blood in the flebotomy as with a horn (ampullary) vein, and the flow is subtle and quick, be aware that it is from an arterial flow; then cut and press on it for a long time; and if the flow stops, as you can see, it is stopped, tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And observe the patient from the moisture of their body, and be extremely careful of them and do not harm that for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the stone cannot be removed and you are not skilled in medicine for this, then incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of the stone is contracted and the stone is dislodged; or take a piece of fig and make a hole in it, and insert that, and take one third of its size and tighten it over the site of the vein with tape and poultices for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the stone is dislodged, then it is good; but if not, treat that with the water as mentioned before in the recollection of the place of the dislodged stones' flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the stone from him is difficult due to the location of the pain and the possibility of ligature of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be wary of the phlebotomist if he is afraid of phlebotomy, for that indicates a nerve; then, after finding the nerve during the phlebotomy procedure, stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and in many cases, it will not heal completely. This nerve causes sensitivity; if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not visible, you must pause the phlebotomy with which you are cutting off the vein and avoid the nerve with all your might.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it removes blood from the head and provides relief to illnesses of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture for bloodletting either an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind any arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Although it may seem convenient for you to have the phlebotomist puncture the vein without first checking its location more carefully, and notice it only after the initial percussion on that spot during a few attempts, this is not recommended, as it could be due to an underlying illness.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Although some people may have a strong sensation of heat in certain areas when not phlebotomized on the first attempt, you should still pay attention to that sign.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy from that vein and its associated accidents are factors to consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translated into English is: "The first of these is what you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of the patient and with caution from the occurrence of illnesses; and phlebotomy is performed on one of the veins in the arm, namely: cephalic, deep, and basilic; and phlebotomy is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or on the first pulse that passes three hours after midnight.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be administered at any time of day or night, as it is convenient and necessary, whether in the morning or evening.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And note that children should not be phlebotomized before the age of 13, women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wishes to be freed from fluid retention by any means, he should cleanse his cavities in front of the flebotomy with a lion's dung, if there is a significant gap retained, so that the veins do not expel the surplus during the flebotomy of the cavities, which are pure, and they do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not be subjected to flebotomy if they are nauseous from sacred knowledge or gluttony, nor should they avoid illness or madness until this is remedied by them, nor should they suffer from hydropic disease, and it is more prudent to postpone the flebotomy until after passing colic, vomit, abdominal pain, and multiplication of urination, defecation, work, exercise during breakfast or vigils, or any cause that weakens vitality, whether in humans or animals.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is appropriate to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard if the swelling is caused by excessive food and drink, and medicines if it is possible for them to help with this.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse yourself in a bath, unless some cause or exercise prevents it, so that the pain is alleviated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around noon, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perforate that foot, which should be guarded on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is excessive work and labor, heat and swelling similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bedside, have the causes of which gout is often experienced by men be present, aromatized and perfumed and with balms and similar things according to the amount possible.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist over another cushion that is softer than the one from which the phlebotomy was to be done.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with the fluebotomy instrument make two or three incisions; and then tighten the ligament with a strap and fold it over twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And whether the stricture is tempered, so that the constriction is not equal, or the stricture is excessive, then the flow of the blood is prohibited; or if it is for softening, then the movement of the blood should be prohibited entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the stricture, so that whoever has been subjected to fluebotomy rubs their hands together between their thighs until the veins are inflamed and visible to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the fluebotomist applies a small amount of ancient oil to their fluebotomy instrument; they place their left hand's digit on the vein, slightly moving it away from the area where the fluebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein protrudes slightly and the pressure is relieved. This is because when the fluebotomy is applied to a vein filled with air, it should be contracted during the fluebotomy, and if it is not, the fluebotomist has succeeded; and the fluebotomy does not damage the vein, and if it does, that part of the vein becomes narrowed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is important that the fleabotomist be skilled and competent in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after completing the flebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, then that is not good; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or applying pressure with your fingers, if the location is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as suddenly the inflammation can turn into an abscess, nor should you immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the flebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not allow you to extract the desired amount, then repeat the flebotomy on that spot according to its rectitude, and adjust the opening a little, and apply pressure in front of the location becoming inflamed, because in many cases, a small opening becomes an abscess.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may sometimes be that the affected area is already inflamed, but do not apply any treatment to it, as it provides no relief; instead, apply some oil to any part of the wound, as it soothes the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And this one is better at this location than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil in all forms of phlebotomy, where phlebotomists cut veins to prevent blood clotting in the body, is a tried and true method. It acts as an antithrombotic and wise choice when one of those is placed over the affected area, because the clot is dissolved and turned when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a great abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy, as it often happens due to various causes, especially when the blood does not flow out but only that which surrounds the vein, or in the appearance of a thin vein, then you should compress and apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it there for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then he should make sure to tie off the vein of that blood, either by completion of itself or by another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not pay it any attention; and if you wish, apply to that place a mixture of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a solution of mint juice or warmth or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often, after accidents or abscesses and bumps appear, you must perform a flebotomy on the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel softness, you must apply pressure to that area; for the swelling is a sign of evil and bad; and thus be careful to place your hand over any cause of this that we have said, as strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an embrocation on the area where there is stiffness, so that the place is hardened, and then take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the pus from everyone according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color above the pus as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the pus is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if you turn it out, let it be done gradually; and similarly if it is hard, let it be drained while preserving its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of him who is full and strong and requires the extraction of pus all at once; in this case, widen the incision into the vein and make the vein incisions broader.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for him who is anxious, do the opposite; and be sure to extract it in several stages, making the incisions narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for performing a vein laceration is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, and know that you should cure that in front of phlebotomy with a little wine infused with millepellets or simple oxymel; and extract the blood from the wound in three or four draws.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold condition, then take wine infused before phlebotomy with myrrh or honey-based elixir aromatic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or an elixir aromatic and strongly perfumed.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is due to the sudden release of a lot of blood, then know that you should take a drink of warm water with fragrant elixir; and use aromatics such as fennel, and chill your feet at the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And employ other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the swelling a second time, focusing on the part from which phlebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the small swelling little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If one wishes to extend their arm and dissolve the swelling a second time, and their body is strong, then do this after seven or eight hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	One may throw the swelling of the body in the opposite direction of its decline, provided that it has been extended on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	One should not treat a body in which there is much swelling that has already been punctured and is acute and causes fever, as it is necessary to evacuate the swelling once and drain a large quantity of it, and thereby increase the perception until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and if you place your hand on the pulse of the swelling, you must hold the body from dying in fainting, because repeated attempts are necessary here when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to loosen the arm and empty the vein a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press on it with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too painful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habantz (after) the layssa (bleeding) has ceased to be fleubotomat (vein-squeezing) secondly; or otherwise, this is done with the acuity of the fleubotomi (vein-clamping) that coagulates the blood in the orrifici (opening) of the vena (vein); or pause (hold) over those of tyriaca alfarach (turpeth root) or sagzenea (cress), and compress slightly until the blood is completely out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, stop the bleeding on it and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it becomes necessary to empty the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, you may bleed it from that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the ceph or basilic, when they are not visible or are obscured, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient inserts their hand into the water-filled vessel until the needle turns red, and the vein becomes clearly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and phlebotomize according to the transverse small, not longitudinally or according to width.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the incision should be wide, and your phlebotomy should be such that you phlebotomize that over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is blocked, insert your hand into the water-filled vessel again and let the blood flow in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the hand's journey in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sun is paused in cold water at the same time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is considered safer than all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the saphenous vein in the right hand is effective for liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy here is that you should tighten your hand with a ligature or around your hand, since it has been immersed in cold water, as long as the vein remains swollen and clearly visible; then phlebotomize transversely; and if you make an incision from top to bottom, this will not harm the patient.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to cut off your hand with phlebotomy, because it contains the nerves of the fingers naked from flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening; and be careful that you do all this in a narrow space.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of the flebotomy of that with the left hand, it is related to the illnesses of the chest.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the flebotomy of him/her as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the healing of the cephalic vein from the flebotomy is for illnesses that are in the distant parts of the body, just as there are illnesses of the chest, and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of the veins and ulcers of the thighs and legs old, and similar to the illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the flebotomy in this case is that the illness pushes its foot into the water and causes friction until the veins appear; it is then wrapped around the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein, having appeared, should be marked with a sign, and from there it branches out in various directions on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, cut the vein widely and leave the leg on the bed next to the marked area, as it is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a flebotomy on the surface of the foot, be careful to avoid the nerves that lie there, and place your hand over it when making the flebotomy, moving along its course as if you were cutting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be brave with the flebotomies.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to drink wine, then you should immerse the foot in cold water and let the urine flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist fails on the first attempt, then he should repeat the phlebotomy in another place, as the area is clean; and do not fear any harm from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the area as we have said is below the talus, near the origin of the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the incision of phlebotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is for the sake of caution against urine retention.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flebotomy is that the disease is bathed, relaxed and tightened the flesh of the thigh from the side of the wide into its sole on four sides with a long thin bandage, only appearing through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, you perform the flebotomy on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the cross section, which is best; either puncture it with an incision or cut it off with a secion, since the location of the disease is dry.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most people not quickly noticed; and if you find it, and it does not appear to be painful for the entire limb, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears at the back of the foot opposite the big toe and the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then carefully dislodge the stricture and place your hand over the site of the femoral surgery, tightening the area as it heals.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	On ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilators can be of wood, or iron, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is achieved through two methods: the first involves the incision and drainage of pus, and the second is ventilation through incision without drainage.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventilation, which involves incision, is also through two methods: either with heat or without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilators that are administered through incision and drainage of pus have twelve locations in the body, one where ventilation is paused, which is the last opening at the top of the head; another in the middle part of two columns; and ventilation from below the jaw, leaving it outside the mouth; two-spaced ventilators; and those of the ribcage, above the end of the ribs; and two-inlet ventilators, each a span wide; and ventilators with two pegs; and ventilators with two pieces.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of blood should not be done from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not remove toxicity through those, but rather it is done by phlebotomy; nor should one cover that bloodletting with fire or apply heat to any illness caused by accumulation within the body until it is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If bloodletting is necessary for an illness or a continuous condition, it should be done at the beginning and end of each month, and at its midpoint and at any other time that seems appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men, the blood becomes concentrated in those who require frequent bloodletting and find it difficult, and they suffer from swelling and hardness in their heads and necks, and from redness and heat on their faces and heads and eyes; and they experience pressure on their faces and foreheads and darkness and weakness in their feet; and they leak the place of their bloodletting; and their laughter is increased; and they taste blood in their mouths, or their tongues are swollen and spittle mixed with blood; and their sleep is increased, and some suffer from hot blood during sleep, with pain, antics, plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when, for any cause of those (conditions), and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, you find that a venting must be done rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And an immediate venting of the neck is when it imparts gravity to the head and what sinks into the shoulders; more importantly, this is a proper evacuation for the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this venting is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of foul composition or in which catarrh is present, as it causes great harm to that part.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, one should not use those vessels, especially in the heads where the maladies are confined.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is continuously pressing on it be relieved; and for this reason, make sure that you order the windbag holder to place his hand lightly on the parts where the pressure has subsided, lest relaxation lead to a recurrence.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The use of the windbag (ventozacio) on the chest is an alternative to phlebotomy of the small vein (vena fusca) and the basilic: it aids in asthma, relaxes constricted airways and cuts through air movement obstructions, as well as helping cough and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And be aware that the windbag should not be pressed too hard on the chest, for if it remains in place for too long, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the windbag applied to the head helps with accidental pains in the head and eye, migraines, and toothache; it is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And beware that you command the fan (or bellows) handler not to press his hand into the scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The fan (or bellows) can also be used to provide comfort to the mouth, and to clean corruption of the gums, and to resemble the conditions of illness in the mouth, taking the place of phlebotomy of the alien substances that are in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the fan used over both palms provides warmth, which is achieved by reflection of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the fan used inside the two hollows provides immediate relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalica, as it draws blood from all those manual veins in the flesh, as well as from the smaller veins of the other, larger veins, to achieve the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the bellows handler not to blow too strongly during scarification, as the area is already devoid of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows used to blow over wounds and apply treatment to hemorrhoids in the anus and to pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should instruct the bellows handler to use a strong bellows, made of iron, as the area requires firm pressure; and its powerful but gentle blows should be used for scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the bellows from the legs should be reduced in size for delicate treatments, as they draw blood from throughout the body, providing relief from old pain in the joints and kidneys, and from the bladder; they induce menstruation and provide relief from breathlessness and coughing; and they serve in place of phlebotomy for two veins, and for binding and incising, and for two pins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Despite weakening the whole body, it causes fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the stretching of the ropes from above causes the healing of the wounds on both legs' vents.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the proper positioning of the ropes is that it stops the wound at the beginning by applying a temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the ropes, rather it releases them lightly, and tightens those as needed, allowing the humors to come to the area naturally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this process until the location becomes red and swollen, and the sign of the wound appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then cut and repeat the suction gradually, and pay close attention to the body's condition.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender skin, be careful to make an incision once and not more, so the place is not ulcered.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bellows to increase the incision depth slightly, and facilitate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein is great, you must make two incisions, because the first incision opens the way for drainage of the vein and its contents.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Make the second incision at the site of the acquired inspection during the extraction of the large vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make a third incision for the final extraction.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the vein little by little or a small one, it is enough for us to make an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a hard stone, make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make a deeper incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places where the suckers are to be applied must be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use oil of aloe or oil of violet, or crushed almond oil, or oil from a cockle; and if it is in winter, then use goosefat, or lilac oil, or chamomile oil, or walnut oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the surplus is thick, stubborn, then use oil of ambergris, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the blister-maker is made of large pieces of tender skin, then it must be prohibited from oil, and at these places where blisters are made on their bodies, the blistering should be with warm water or cold water from a bath, or vinegar water, or wine water, and similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose skin is very moist, washes their blisters with wine or vinegar water, or myrtle and sumac water, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are thick, wash their blisters with old wine or water of fennel, which is marjoram, or from anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it must be guarded away from baths; as it is administered immediately before or after a bath for an hour or two, and it must sleep near the blister.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before ventilation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has had blood drawn is irritable and has sharp pain and inflammation, then you must take causes that bring coldness, such as with milky cucumbers, endive in wine, laytuguas (a type of herb), secanabin (possibly a type of plant), julep (a medicinal drink), and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should abstain from food such as poultry, young meat, and foods seasoned with spices.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking alcohol made from almonds, or alcaparras (capers) seed oil, and sumac, and often smell a mixture of wine and nutmeg between vegetables and meat; and it is recommended that they limit their intake of alcohol and food, abstain from poultry, rabbit, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, the liquid intake should be greater than the food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to provide some men with a drink of tyria, or other muscle relaxants such as musk, especially before ventilation or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and one should not take that scorching heat.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, not all vents are scars; they should be stopped on the liver, and over the navel, and in places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not suffer scarification.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those who only have pain in a member due to the attraction of humors; thus, they use a paused vent on the breast in the case of flux of humor from the nose; and employ that method to dissolve the stuck ventilation within the member, just as they pause over the stomach and navel; for it rarifies the member, scorches it, and removes pain as it resolves the ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is now placed over the lumps when they occur in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves their compression and eradicates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to occur when it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction as needed; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered by filling them with hot water in the ailments of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation be filled and a great abscess forms, it is only hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a wound administration over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the ointment should be the thickness of a palm; and in the width of it, at the place that is in the circumference, half of it, the passage should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use ery or citrus, with thick margins, lion, alligator, and terry fabrics to prevent the member from moving out of its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, there should be a transverse mark of ery or iron, where the candle is held over fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wound is much greater than the one we have previously treated; and its size is smaller according to the illness and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the force of suction from the cups on children and weak bodies is different from that on young people and those with strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the technique for applying this suction is to hold the fire over a piece of wood with decent heat in front of a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse branch at the exact spot of the cup, so that the fire is lit around the edge, preventing any harm to the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Once the cup is applied to the patient's member, as we have described, and while we have the fire, before the cups are removed, we should ensure that the said fire touches the wood and ignites the vapor on that surface; then the suction will be quickly released.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And hold the fire according to your preference, repeating it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Place a suction cup that is applied in the case of pleurisy, filled with water without crossing or breaking, and it should only be placed on the affected member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And the larger the suction cup, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter LXXVII
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting instruments are not administered in all members, but only in those where the placement of suction cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the nose and similar parts; or in members devoid of flesh, like the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments in the infected waters of putrid boils.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And in the morning and night, it is placed in lukewarm water until they are relieved, and no cause of discomfort arises in their abdomen; then the body is evacuated through flebotomy and venesection; and the affected members are rubbed until they turn red; and they should be held still.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and the case is closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the area with venesection, it is more beneficial in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, wash the area with hot water and then apply cold; it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the fever persists and the abscess of the bloodsuckers does not heal, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water and place it over it until the discharge stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the abscess multiplies, sprinkle upon it dried vitriol or gall and substances similar to those used for stoppage causes, until the abscess is drained; or apply heat over the area with crushed fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the site, and the abscess is drained.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it becomes necessary, apply bloodletting, when it is possible to change those (blood vessels).
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is forbidden for suspension, then the place with the recent abscess should be rubbed or a needle left in the places until an abscess forms; and afterwards, they should be restrained, because those who feel any pain soon give in.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to open, sprinkle upon them some dried aloe, or salt, or ash, and do this several times.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment for the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this way of thinking among scientists in our land is lacking; and you should not forget it at any time; nor have I devoted myself to that later, except through the long study of the books of the Ancients and the understanding of their writings, from which I extracted science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have also added experience and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge encompasses and over which I have gained experience; for I wish to make it accessible to others and free from the occupation of enlargement; and I have condensed it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it various forms of the instruments that are administered there, by addition of explanation, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	**Summary and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those which must be mentioned before we begin the remembrance of amputated members and the various ones of each.**
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	**Therefore, let us state in the preamble of this chapter the sums of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which the artisans are forced at the beginning, and at rest concerning the truth of those; it is for you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.**
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you must pay attention to the beginning with phlebotomy or remove that part, or in some cases, if no specific cause prohibits, with the debility of virtue, or it is the one that happens suddenly, or weak from decrepitude, or there is time for severe heat, or severe friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And it is also beneficial in its diet with herbs, and meat of fowl, and crabs; it prohibits fatty meats and stuffing, and all food that fills the veins with rust, as long as you are careful to avoid abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of material into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original condition, to which they are accustomed, and by which the pain usually subsides.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be healed, you must ensure that the patient is fed nutritious foods with plenty of motion and not too heavy or dense, such as food made from flour soaked in water, and rice, and beans, and meat, and veal, and fresh fish, and large vegetables and similar foods, and following this regimen brings about the coagulization of the fracture more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones become brittle in old age and in the frail, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature because of the drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they continue to be consolidated and continuous according to their nature as long as the members are dried out, and they are only continued and consolidated at the end of laziness, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause similar to gout in which a swelling occurs that adheres and strengthens the joint that is always glued together, until the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, so long as any cause does not prohibit it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to refrain from the patient's food, food in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness are predominant, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The various types of fractures depend on the different parts of the body affected.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the arm bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; a fracture of the foot bone is distinct from a fracture of the leg bone; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And having refreshed your memory of every species of fracture, expounded in its separate chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is great diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture that occurs in them, while another kind happens due to stars falling; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: such as sagittal, stellate, and transverse fractures, both proceeding and not proceeding from a cause, just as it is done in writing, and there is a fracture by plague and disruption in the head, and a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for all species, there is a specific pain or torment inherent in their restoration according to the distinct memory of its location.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is known as bone fracture: it is the deformation of the bone, and that elevation and sensation upon touching, and only when you press upon it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent deformation in the location and it does not feel painful upon touch when you press on the bone, and the patient feels little to no pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformation or small fracture, where you do not press upon it with your hand and feel pain, but rather apply medications of which you have had success in the past at the appropriate time and place; then it is very tight due to subtle tightness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the location, when it is arched and does not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it naturally, if the entire part of its counterpart is torn away, then you must begin from your hour of correction of the habit that happened to it post-facto with cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the post-facto cautery causes an abscess, then leave it for a few days until the abscess ceases; and afterward, apply that according to any manner or means of elevation and engineering that you can devise.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and stitching of it is lighter than the bone in which the satagical incident happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And afterward, tighten it according to the return of its remembrance.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If there are only slight satagies in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position holding the member should be according to its natural shape, while the tensions on the stretched member are released, then you pierce to return those additional parts to their proper place and according to any way that you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength not to harm the patient with your operation, nor cause any injury; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure at that opportune moment to apply your hand to it, and if you notice any other cause, correct that and engage that with the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscesses with their operations, or they cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen through the operations of their foolish motions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, apply equal pressure and complete the operation and tightness of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about it and make him move in a way that does not aggravate that during his vigils and sleep, and observe his movements and agitation, and you must take care of his excretion, and all his movements at full strength; wait until the position of the member is one in which the pain is relieved, which is caused when it is in the disposition of the member's condition or injury; then understand that you change its position to another one where it does not feel pain; and be careful that the position of it is straight and equal, so that no twisting occurs to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the member is what you should consider, because you must know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And regarding those that are small like the arm and elbow and similar to those, understand that the envelopment should be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Those who suffer from such a condition as gout, where the joint or limb is swollen and hard, should know that it involves all parts, connecting the large member tightly to every other part with stiffness equal, so nothing enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, as it begins, you should start the patient's evacuation of flatulence, applying appropriate lubrication to that area, over the site of the fracture using three or four wraps depending on the member; and tighten your hand slightly on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then, move to the upper part of the site of the fracture, and tighten less than you tightened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then, gradually lengthen the wrap around the site of the fracture, and gently ease the tightness little by little, until you take from the location a great gap.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then, take another bandage and wrap it around the other side over the site of the fracture, moving the wraps away from the fracture; and perform your operation on the tightness of the wrap and its mollification according to what we said about the first wrap above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the folds of cloth or linen, which conforms to the contortions of the fracture, if there is contortion; otherwise, do not place any cause upon it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place upon the other side, and wrap these star-shaped compresses neatly around it, as soon as the swelling or abscess is under control, and place your attention on what caused the abscess and the inflammation; leave that for a few days; and then tighten the bandages around it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of various types, well-formed; or of willow wood; or of palm fronds; and each bandage should have a certain width according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, note that the bandage placed over that fracture should be thicker and more tightly wrapped than the others; its length according to the measurement of the member in magnitude and smallness; tighten the bandages on the other side as per your initial tension; and then tie them from above decently as we have said about the tension, and it is that your tension should be according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the less the tension.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And take care that the threads are stronger in thickness and fineness, and numerous; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in certain operations where pauses the thread of cords twisted from them, it is a great error when the tightness is equidistant.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Indeed, very fine threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and you will not realize that there is less than a finger between one thread and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the disease is localized in the extremities of the bones, tighten the bandages in those places without causing injury, using linen or woolen threads until it ceases.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the fracture is similar to an epidemic, causing disruptions in the chain, and it comes to mind again in those mentioned in the second chapter due to its particularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely severed member is not immediately straightened by binding; this is because when the member is large, it cannot be covered with bindings right away, but rather after several days, or five or seven, depending on your certainty of preventing an abscess from forming.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of splints that the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of splinting for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat or friction should not be applied: take flour dust, which is the core of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that does not work, take a piece of thin and not too delicate fabric, cut it to shape, and apply the splint.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migra, which is obtained from the milled salvage of all parts of the nettle; mirra and aloe in equal parts; alcohol in double the amount; mix all these ingredients with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's condition allows it; then apply this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores slightly broken bones, and confers benefits to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster that provides relief for fractures and twists: prepare migra and add white alder in equal parts, milled nettle, mirra, aloe, acacia, and Armenian honey in double the amount.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients are mixed in a mortar with a strong force, then sieved and prepared with water or egg albumen, and administered as needed.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering joints and bones separated from their locations, and pain occurs accidentally in these and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool and immerse it in warm wine and oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not intended for restoration, it prevents pus formation and effectively expels pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppy flowers, mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a rapid plaster administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you wish to resolve the healing of an abscess: take roots of alder, chamomile flowers and violet flowers, all ground; mix them with wine, let it be thoroughly triturated and sealed in a jar, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that to the affected area with cold water from parsley or any other cold water.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a poultice with stronger effect for resolution than the first, when there is a hard abscess, it involves preparing a mixture of chamomile, fennel seed, licorice root, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile flowers, and any other herbs; all are crushed and mixed with either sage water, rosewater, or wine, according to the condition of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not state in his work that it should be placed on the affected member before its restoration unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made; he recommends a mixture of both coarse and fine materials.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A goat's hair can be used as a poultice on the member after its restoration and for conditions that require cooling, just as myrrh, lint, and similar substances are used for similar purposes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of millet, chamomile petals from man's hair or goose feathers, and salt, mix them together, strain and grind them, and make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the amount is such that it covers and loosens the adhesion, and indeed it is separated, consider whether there was no pain or discomfort, nor was a bone broken, in which case it is not worth disturbing from its place, for then you should not dislodge before morning.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or pressure or swelling at the site, then immediately remove or loosen that plaster, and do not apply a new one.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and a sponge from the sea, make it moist, and immerse that in hot water until the pain and discomfort cease and the joint is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; next, place over it clean wool soaked in vinegar or rose oil, and wrap it up for a night, ensuring there is no risk of infection, and helping to reduce inflammation and the pain in the joint.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that delicate constriction and apply a small plaster, not tightening it with your initial tightness, but gently pressing it until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have subsided, and you feel a need for a plaster and constriction, then repeat that as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs in the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove it, but wait three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days, as you see fit, due to the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and adjust the thickening of the patient's food according to the recall of their condition.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried and weakened but not covered, then know that nutrition is forbidden to reach it; so immerse that part in hot water several times a day for three days, and ease the tightness a little, allowing this operation to bring nutrition to the member, and heal it moderately.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what these foolish restorers of a member's fracture do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to its covering, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon who did this, he would increase the ancient wounds in his free moments and heal them towards this.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that shatters all the bone within the joint, leaving it as shattered as a fragment of wood, hence this type is called 'ascial'; or space cuts through a part of the bone, cuts the flesh, and the incision does not go entirely through its posterior side; and this type of fracture is called 'levatio absoluta'.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and they can be caused by compression or distraction; and their cause is a blow or impact on a hard object, and they resemble each other in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, causing the panniculus (fatty tissue) to herniate around the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when it is a fracture that is confined to the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a description of a fracture caused by impact or sudden force, where a thin layer of bone cracks and breaks away from the main structure, similar to what happens in a hairline crack. It often occurs in concave areas, such as when an ery (maybe a bone or joint) experiences impact and subsequently fractures.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This type of fracture is primarily observed in the bones of children, especially when they are very young.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	These various types of fractures, in their stages, also appear as separated stars. (This could be a poetic or metaphorical way of describing the fractured bone structure.)
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then, the patient should have a complete rest in this position.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have come to know all these types of fractures by examining them, and by trying to understand their appearance and the state of the flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	This specific capillary is known for being discovered when the bone is exposed, cleaned, and covered with a attempt, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginning of the patient's illness, and if you examine their symptoms, it reveals the cause of their pain, just as vomiting due to anger, extension, loss of consciousness, absence of speech, fainting, acute fever, discharge of pus from wounds, and redness—all these resemble symptoms in serious conditions. Therefore, unless it is evident that they are sane, one must not attempt to heal them.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If one examines non-corrosive symptoms, one hopes for healing, and then begins to treat them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the pain has come to you at the beginning as it does and this occurs in the days of winter, then be aware that you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to your disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then be aware that you must keep an eye on the bone in front of the 7th day, as what remains of the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then be aware that you must incise the fractured and inflamed part as I have mentioned before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you cut open the patient's thigh, discover the bone according to its usual place and manner, as possible according to the figure of the plague, and bind it over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you find yourself with a bone fracture, pus or abscess, carefully approach it with something that covers, and place clean cloths soaked in wine and oil on the area, and allow the swelling to subside until the abscess is healed and be certain of the pus flow; then begin with the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you make an incision in the bone with a straight scalpel, and this is its form: Then apply another scalpel to it, slightly wider than the first one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then apply the scalpel with a wider cut than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you use many scalpels, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter. They must be of sharp edges at their tips, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their help to facilitate percussion over the incision to prevent damage to the head and harm to that area.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and dense, be careful that you do not pierce through its circuit in front of administering the incisions with the instruments, which are called non-deep cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this way, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone in the testis to which it is attached, so that at the cut, its extreme or margin is round, or like a small circle, which prevents submersion and the passage of the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each suited to the specific nature of each bone, as long as you are present in all parts of the brain, the end of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the amount of specificity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method of three kinds of treatments: When drilling through the fracture of a bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and turn it as you know that the bone is penetrated; then change the position of the instrument and stop at whatever point determines the thickness of the ray or surrounds it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then, using scissors or similar tools, make an incision between any parts of the bone, creating a thin space from which you can drain the pus as described earlier, to remove the bone or your hand, or due to any other cause that prompts you to use certain instruments designed for this purpose, such as tenacles and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the instrument does not touch any part of the healthy tissue.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So, once you have drilled through the bone and separated it from healthy tissue if it is connected to it, you will extract it, be careful to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone itself with a tool resembling scissors, but ensure that it is both thorough and gentle compared to other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you cut any part of the small bones or joints, take hold of it with ease using what is appropriate for you among your tools; and then apply a cure to the wound with liniment and bandage them as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is gentle, free from pain, which has been practiced by the Greeks and praised for great glory; and this is how it is said: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and evident, as soon as you have uncovered that part and paused, fix the end of this cutting tool slowly and carefully, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is wide and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts, advancing in length, so when you have done this; adjust the lenticular cut to the shape of the face of the acute cut on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then carefully strike the incision of a limb with a small mallet until all the bones are easily separated as it is rotated; be sure of the pannicul that does not occur in it accidentally in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their affairs; certainly, he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If, however, there is some cause attached to the bones of the pannicul in certain places of the body, then make an incision on that part of the instrument lenticular, and separate it from the bone with ease, for it is separated from it without difficulty and without pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pannicul, and that which is separated or left attached to the bone is the facia, containing in it hardness and delicate fibers, then cover those hard spots and eradicate those delicate fibers with precise razors, which you have prepared in various numbers, so that it will be possible for you to apply them in all places to the most appropriate extent of their use, according to how your operation turns out on the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why the bone begins to swell from these cuts, and then use it for the subtle pus of the swelling, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the heavenly and subtle pus of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small breaks or subtle cracks, be sure to administer treatment according to what you have to achieve the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is cause that it is not retained about all of those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us focus on what we have written regarding great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicul (fatty tissue) is tightly bound when you eliminate the bone, then be sure to take a cloth from it according to the quantity of the swelling, submerge that in warm oil and place it over the affected area; then take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse that in vinegar and water, and place it over the first cloth, making it as soft as possible without damaging the skin; and then apply a dressing of salt, and do not tighten that unless necessary based on the size of the swelling.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the safety of the apotheca; then remove that and administer medicines as necessary, such as linseed oil and flour of herbs, and powder of roots and aromatics, and similar things to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this powder from these medicines that is sprinkled on the affliction when it is dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicine of the proper kind of which he or she abstains and does not suffer.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the affliction in your treatment is clear; and do not let there be any obstruction of ointment or other things; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and brings about a bad outcome, and causes great harm to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull of the head, as when it is purified, the bones are affected and even more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if it affects the patient's condition, knowing that it is harmful to all of his or her faculties.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if a darkness does not occur from the medicine that is placed upon it, but rather from the virtue of that medicine which causes that darkness, then take a quantity of honey and crushed olive oil in equal parts, and with those linements wrap the affected area; then place your hand over it; and treat it with the healing spices that are appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two places at once, but rather one of those bones or some other part, so that there are two bones in it, because the broken part is cartilaginous and not shattered, and damage to it occurs only through attrition, tortuosity, and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece into its nose, and use that to hold together the fracture from within with the same indicated tool, and from outside with another, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this to facilitate for yourself, and be careful not to cause harm during your operation on the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not heal there, then you should equalize the pressure at the end of the line where the swelling is greatest.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should do as follows:
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And seek to restore it on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, carefully apply cold or hot compresses, depending on the pain, for seven to ten days until healing is complete.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of clean cloth into the end of the nose at the site of the fracture if it is in one part, or use two pieces of cloth if the fracture is in two parts, making sure that they are thick enough to fill the nasal cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And so some of the ancient restoratives are that the swelling be infiltrated with a border, and changed throughout the day, but it is not seen by me; after learning that the joint is infiltrated with albumen of chicken as a paste of flour; and then lay it until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, it is found in the nose instead of swelling, due to an acute fracture of the nose that prevents breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary; and if you wish, do it, and if you prefer, use swelling.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another case of post-operatory infection occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or a strip dipped in hot vinegar and rose oil, or a mixture.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not prevent gangrene, then cover that part outside with flour of sizami and powder of confited almonds mixed with egg albumen, and place your hand over it to stop the flow of blood, and do not tie a nose to it for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If your nasal bones are broken or cracked, then you must clean them and extract any fragments using suitable instruments; then apply a cut along the fracture and cure it with what incarnates and solidifies, and plaster it as required.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you suffer from an infection inside your nose, then you must clean it with steam and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter IV**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**Restoring the Mandible After a Break**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is solely external, not split in two and curved inward, then its healing will be light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, introduce your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right little finger, pushing gently from within to facilitate the healing process, while your other hand supports the external part of the broken bone, ensuring proper alignment.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both segments, ensuring their alignment is as correct as possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a tooth dislocation and separation, you should use those of gold, silver, or cedar thread; then place a cerat over the broken mandible, wrap it with a doubled cloth, and cover that with a large, carefully made pad, or a single piece of material the length of the mandible; finally, secure it as appropriate using the equipment at your disposal, without damaging it.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and abstain from eating excessively large meals.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you estimate that the shape has been altered in any way on the third day, then cut and release the affected area; correct what has already been altered, apply a powder made from flour, or albumen from eggs, or sesame flour, since you will have removed the plaster, and place wool over the poultice.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And having thus placed and adjusted the poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not release it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for this fracture usually heals tightly in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication, such as an abscess, occurs, then administer what we have mentioned about the treatment of the fracture until it heals, and drain that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe injury, consider whether it's a broken bone or dislocated joints, then you must carefully hold those dislocations in place with what is appropriate for that condition during removal of those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, you should enlarge them with a flebotomy according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you've held those dislocations, and it's not possible to remove them any further, you should then open the wound's opening if it's narrow; otherwise, place a bandage over that one of the dressings appropriate for it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	It seems like the text you provided ends abruptly, making it challenging to determine its context or continue the translation accurately. The term "Capitol" here might refer to a chapter in the medical treatise, but without more content, a direct translation is not feasible. Could you provide additional lines from the text for a more comprehensive translation?
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the fork when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the muscles break the fork (bone), it can be fractured in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Depending on the fracture, it may be broken but not separated, or separated into two parts that do not occur simultaneously; it is harder to restore it; or it occurs with complications, making restoration difficult.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for that operation, when the fracture is with complications, you should have two assistants; one to hold the broken fork and assist, and another to stretch the muscle at the site of the break.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then reduce the fracture to its original shape, making sure it is not in a state of excessive bulging or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, wait until the pressure from the bandage on the wound is lifted using cloth or wool, and adjust its length according to your necessity; then extend and raise the fork and tighten it with your hand as much as necessary to engage the friction according to what you feel.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to the external parts, due to its length being insufficient, then wait until the patient's pain is relieved, and place a cushion over their thigh, approximately halfway in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the attendant should press on the muscle at the joint while lifting the fork's end towards the fracture, and then you will correct the fracture and engage it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any stiffness in the fork and it is hindered, then you should cut through it and extract those obstructions to facilitate its use.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, you will make an incision from it with one of the knives that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument used by the chirurgian, aside; and this is the form of the instrument:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles a cup, and its depth should be according to what you have needed it for, whether the bone is large or thin.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; there should be two ends, thus, with one end wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you extracted the fragment from the bone is wide and secure from aperture, then you will adjust both edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the rupture is minor or you fear infection, use a clean cloth and poultice according to the amount of plague tear.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If infection occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in hot vinegar and olive oil, and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the bone fracture is severe and deep, make a paste from flour ground from barley meal and apply it over the wound, place a warm compress on top, and then add hair from a lion's tail (if available), and if needed, use human hair. Then sprinkle powders twice over the foot and the paste; take a thin table knife, its length should be about three fingers wide, and cut it into pieces of similar size; wrap each piece in cloth and place them on top of the fracture site; then apply more humectant as you turn it, and rotate that over the patient's body, removing any hair from around the wound, and reduce the swelling. This is what should not be overlooked.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And, as long as the bone does not become infected; and so that you may notice the malady each day, when the ligament becomes soft or you see the bone already infected, then correct it and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then hold the patient's sleep over their collarbone and place a small cushion beneath it to slightly elevate their sleep during the night; so that at that time, the supporters of their arm from the side of that bone are elevated, and thus is raised the fracture of the furcula to the elevation of the muscle; or, alternatively, their arm is bent at the collarbone.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless you notice swelling or an abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the bandage if you see that it is falling off, adjust its tightness, restore it, and leave it until it is healed and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and supported according to its most severe state in 28 days, and in some cases, it is experienced by some people in less than that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken at its lateral location, not from its central part but from its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the central part is broken and it is broken in the middle location of its body, and it is not known but by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you should prepare it and reduce it back to its natural state in every way possible with the aid of a tool.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a fine powdery flour made from wheat and stop it with; and apply a dusting of doubled cloth; and place the blade gently on one side of a thin table according to the quantity of the broken spatula, or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a substance to make it even.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly with a tongue of human origin, constricting and firmly holding the sheet in place so that it does not come out of its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the moisture daily; every time it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the sheet if it comes out of place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And attend to the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 10 days or 25th (day).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore, when this period is completed, you will dissolve the binding, and you must be certain that it is from among the bones whose beginning does not cause fear or the dissolution of their union.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a ligature there, then cut it open, stop it, and treat as we have said regarding the fracture of the furcula in the case of apostema caut if this should happen here.
Capitol .vii.	**Capitol VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of Broken Legs.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Legs are sometimes broken in the middle, and this requires prolonged treatment; because their ends tend to heal more quickly than the middle, which often becomes deformed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And one of the consequences of a break in the middle of the leg is that it bends inward, causing severe pain, difficulty in moving, and all kinds of symptoms, such as heat, swelling, and vomiting; and it is evident in the hollow of the broken bone and not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the contours of their body, performing the operation with subtlety according to every manner possible and appropriate for this, so that the form of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of salve or cloth, similar in consistency to a bandage, wrapping it around the broken bone gently; pay close attention to the bandage throughout, tightening it as needed, and relax its tension when it softens.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it becomes necessary to cause the discharge of any corrosion, inflammation, pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then cut and drain it, removing the plaster and rectifying what has happened by way of healing it; adjust the bandage if needed, ensuring it is for the patient's benefit.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly, but in serious places that affect the back; and to the ends of their joints, distant from the impact, it does not cause such pain as those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not concealed from the sense, you must inquire of him according to his words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is such that it heals the fracture as they say, according to the manner possible, within which it is swallowed according to what covers, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined to the internal parts, it causes severe pain and punctures for the patient, just as punctures occur in those who have pleured, and because of this the bone becomes inflamed; it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of bitter matter; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ancients have ingeniously devised this most cunning device.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of these things they say: cover and stop the intake of food for the patient that causes inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the rupture is driven out to the sides.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should avoid this lest it cause a slight injury to generate an abscess, if it happens; and if it already has, then help it immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also say that certain things should be applied to reduce wind and suck out strength; and it seems reasonable, yet there is fear that the wind may throw off excess fluid to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also say: cover the area with cloth that has been soaked in hot oil cauterization, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, making sure the bandage adheres according to its rounded shape; and it is treated for the patient's illness with pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the disease causes a violent contraction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the disease, then cut open over the spot, uncover the broken rib, and place your hand above it to hold it still, recall the instrument that preserves the health, the memory of which is preceded, and cut into the bone easily, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is appropriate to adjust the two lips of the ulcer if it is large, using cautery, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and apply dust in warmed oil over the spot, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And elevate him on pillows on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	**Chapter IX**
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can fracture and their cartilage can be damaged, resembling the fractured spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already relaxed, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or strain those parts, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not feel pain, then you should know that they will not recover, and in such conditions, it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in the parts that are strained and pierced, then know that the pressure on the bone is relieved and the illness will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that it has already softened, the pain occurs in those parts where it happened before, and when you lie on your side, you have difficulty breathing and moving at will, sometimes it raises itself onto its sides and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and do not attempt its cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause occurs from those, then the cause is better and more easily resolved.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is that you pierce at the seat of the abscess with a hot cauterize iron placed over the affected spine or oil soaked cloth, or apply vinegar to the abscess; place that on the area some times until the abscess of the cauterize iron becomes sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now place a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it around that area, and instruct the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not sleep on the side where they feel pain until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If the dislocation occurs of a leg bone or any cause that is already separated from it, you must secure it with bandages and hold that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing if necessary; and also care for the flesh around the swelling, as long as it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the end of the bone is broken and it is the final stage of healing, you must then insert that piece with your left hand into its place, and with your right hand, hold the broken bone as tightly as possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones within it, then do as follows: secure those, hold them in place, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the joint.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the joint are often broken, and when they break, the fracture of them is not uncommon in the extremities of those parts, and they are sharp at their length and decline into pieces; and it happens to the patient with pain in that place and a feeling of weakness, when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that part which is above the fracture, as it were, taking hold of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should bind that part according to what you have learned by experience, in such a way as to bring it back to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or that it has already declined into pieces, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have wrapped her up, apply the plaster to her, and then place on top that board of wood or iron, and tighten by pressing without fear of breaking or removing the star (or bandage).
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Wrap the concavity with something that fills it and ensures the tightness is even, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess forms cautiously, then stop the extension of the abscess and its restoration until it is calm, and apply to it what was mentioned before; then return to the restoration of the abscess, and tighten it thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it occurs in the joints or bones is broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the broken assistant (or, potentially, "on the healing of the fracture of the attendant/helper").
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a piece of wood roughly the size of a medium-sized stick...
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if both ends of the ligament are seen to be torn, then suspend it from an elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Then guide the patient onto a side, and pull the broken arm out over the stick until it reaches the point of curvature in the middle where it is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the minister should extend this to the other parts as well; and the physician must apply pressure with his hands to the fracture until it heals properly.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is to have the patient lie on their back and raise their chest with one hand, while the other minister holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other takes the discharge from below them; and each of them extends themselves according to their ability.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, strengthen your grip on the fracture with both ligaments and have each of the two ministers extend themselves in opposite directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half below the fracture towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is near the shoulder, then you should stop the ligament at that place and over that shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse that in easy water and facilitate the work; then, when it is immersed according to its shape and applied with proper application, tighten it gently unless an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess forms, leave the tightness within six days and place a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil over it to soothe the abscess; then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of tightening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on the assistant, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unwrap the cloth and tighten on the assistant's arm to keep the arm in place; if there is no other cause that prevents it, the broken bone will heal properly.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stitches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that one should place over the fracture a splint that is both thick and strong compared to the other splints; and between each splint, space out the distance of the finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break, adding three parts from the total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten the splints with the tension and rigidity that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the tension over the fracture site should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the less tension there is along the fracture, the lesser the stricture will be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, considering the position of the splints and the tension as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and the ties within the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And likewise, consider the dressing on all wounds for three days to prevent a second occurrence of protrusion or inflammation; foods that reach the member should be restricted due to the excess of tightness; and thus, rectify everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that nothing of this nature will occur, do not remove the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the broken member a warm poultice of wool, and consider at every hour during the night or day that the form of the severed limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing becomes soft; thus, rectify this with all your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And now hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that the food is subtle at first until it begins to tighten, and then you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the assistant and the leg support is that they should be tightened for 10 days, and you will notice that they become relaxed and should be given baths and medicated with ointments that rectify this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is old and infected, you will not relax that ligature and stitches for one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	**Chapter XII**
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	**On the Restoration of Arm Fractures**
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, and it is this bone that is called the 'little arm', and the other is larger and is situated below the smaller one, starting from above.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger or smaller vessels are severed, they are often cut at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller vessel is severed above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is much quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the vessel of it is severed below, the fracture of it is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is worse when two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller vessel above, it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it, as small extensions should be facilitated before it becomes entangled.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the larger vessel is what is severed, then it requires more extensive treatment.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two wounds are simultaneously lacerated, then you must press the extraction of the foreign object with much more force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand in such a way as to promote the restoration and extension of it over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be at a lower level than all other parts, so that the pain is centered on a well-prepared pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of it or adjust its position, so that the pain does not shift or move.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the assistant should extend their arm to the side, away from the patient's hand or limb, and another assistant extends theirs above it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bone within its cavity as best they can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstructions, you will pierce and reduce all the weight to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separated fragment that will not respond to treatment and restore itself, then you should sever it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe, you have already dealt with it in a previous chapter, and so now take care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if there occurs an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a bandage made with oil and white wax, gently between precision and subtlety, tighten the bandage over that area to loosen the abscess; remove the bandage and apply a paste prepared from ground chalk, and place stars; and let the star be placed over the fracture, both more distant and firmer.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fragments together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater strength and vehemence, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or below it increases, ease the pressure slightly more gently according to how the patient's pain subsides at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread by which they are tightened should be neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs which requires correction, and as the pain strikes the member, then cover it with a water-soaked compress until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not constrict the member until it relaxes, then return to the original tightness.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness is already softened and the bone has regained its shape, resembling those before, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then it is necessary to soften that slightly and leave it for a few days until the nutrition flows to it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not have any of the causes of pain that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hold the patient's hand suspended by their virtue of agile movement, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the state of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers**
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal properly unless the natural movement is preserved.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand or finger experiences a fracture or dislocation, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and places their hand over the affected area to maintain its position.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the physician should carefully align the broken bones and ensure they are properly aligned, using splints or other means to maintain their position.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover it with a plaster and stopgap, otherwise gangrene may occur; and return the cloth to its place according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the deep parts within the belly of the palm, then make it like a piece of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze that part of their palm which is fractured; then tightly wrap a long cloth around it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the cloth under the body should be like a piece of cloth in which it is immersed, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it as much as it covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with cloth and another piece of cloth on the part left in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and tighten the bandage, thus as the hand is rotated to its normal position between the joints.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you suffer a fracture in any of the bones of the hand, when it is the little finger, it should be splinted according to its position and held tightly with the palm, and if you wish, you can place a small right-angled splint beneath it to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of the other fingers, just as in the middle finger, or index, or on the ring or little finger, it should be splinted and bound to the finger with which it is affected; or all the fingers can be bound together in sequence, which is better; or a small right-angled splint can be placed over it, as we have said for the little finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and appropriately position the caustic aperture and opposition - against your operation - with what covers when you encounter any cause of those, as described in the narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	**Chapter XIV**
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and its fracture is determined according to the extent of the damage and the presence of pain.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is placed beneath the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends the ligament to its full extent according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is desired to straighten the thigh, then the ligament should be pulled from the opposite side towards the knee, so that its extension is achieved, and the other ligament left beneath the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the fracture appears to be severe, then make the ligament proper over it and extend it to the neighboring parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as close as possible to their natural position, and joining the bone by a good union. He must then cover it with plaster and bandages, otherwise the member may become gangrened.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If gangrene occurs in the member, then leave it for some days until the gangrene has subsided, and afterwards resume your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be made as follows: It is necessary to wrap around the fracture a hard strip of cloth, folding it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the wound.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long thin piece between the thigh and leg near the joint, allowing the ends of the piece to protrude from both parts, then turn over the bandage and adjust it over the thigh and leg, removing any excess.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then apply pressure over the thigh at the site of the fracture, and use one stick on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the void between the thigh and leg with soft cloth, to ensure that the constriction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And commence with a strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four wraps, and as you extend further away from the fracture site, your compression should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the piece to the opposite parts until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other side to prevent the ligament from shifting from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the compression over it so that it does not affect the infected member with gangrene or pus or similar; and if any cause of those arises, then carefully remove it from there and correct what happens immediately, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone itself, then cover it with what you have available; otherwise, apply a poultice and remove the cause, and treat that from which the recollection of the pain arises until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned with simply using bandages, as we have said in the aid and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring it in such a way, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, then apply the other leg to it, but it is necessary that the limb from which there has always been pain, should limp for some time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a little less or a little more, and all of this depends on the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Humerus**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the humerus in the arm often results in prolonged suffering; it frequently causes muscle atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is not only a crack or break in its parts; this is a great affliction or torment, and all of this has been at the expense of sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, within the limits of what can be added and joined together in a way that is both accurate and facile, and in accordance with construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a compress and place it over that round wound, if needed; tighten a bandage around it as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus taking great care and similar to those that oppose any accident that is appropriate for its healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called the femur; and the other is thin, and it is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and therefore restoration is made to them equally as with the arm itself, and the operation on them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone of the ankle is broken in pieces, the leg is fractured in several places.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone of the ankle is broken in a large and thick manner, it will be felt deeply, and it is among those conditions that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension, compression, and traction of the bones according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is recent and has not yet undergone many stages, extension should be less and more gentle, and it is better to let nature heal it with your aid.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you bind the steels and complete all the tie operation, then you will take pieces of hard wood on which the causes that are left are based, solely on palm branches; arrange them from those to which a little roughness is required, and do not use the hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from within to the most distant part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each leg with a cloth in two layers according to its length, place one end of the leg's bandage at the joint of the thigh and the other on the opposite side, ensuring they are properly positioned within the foot's deep spaces.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then secure the two bandages at three points on each extremity and in the middle, as this tightness prevents the leg from bending at the joints, keeping it in a stable position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now, a piece of leather is applied according to the length of the leg, securing it in place to ensure the limb remains still.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure this is done in cases of fracture, and when that condition is properly diagnosed.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then, each day, examine the leg and carefully study its condition, paying attention to any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar issues. If any such cause arises, promptly apply the appropriate treatment until healing occurs.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their treatments.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely suffer fractures, but they do experience strain due to improper positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do suffer a fracture and those bones become elevated above each other, then the patient should lie on their side with the affected foot prepared accordingly.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and press and crush them, and bind them until they return to their proper place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten it around the foot with its natural flexibility, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which you are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as the pain passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is as known to you.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if someone says it is broken, then restore those, intertwine them as they were and reconnect them to your hand in the restoration of those said bones.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place this splint according to the length of the finger, and slightly bend it on each side; and leave the foot on this table which is now reconnected, and tighten its natural flexibility.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then place your hand on each side of the quantity wrapped in lion's cloth, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an incision in the foot's belly so that it has a good hold.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pay attention to any accident related to this.
Capitol .xviii.	**Capitol .xvii.** (or .XVIII, depending on the numbering system used)
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On Fracture of the Condyle of the Femur, the Os of the Patella, and the Mandible of the Man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the condyle of the femur is broken, make a cut in the curved surface, then slightly incline it towards the back, and hold it in place behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the canal with hot water and applies it to the joint as desired; the woman is made to bend, and slowly her two legs are raised until everything is drained out, so that the canal is opened before the extraction of the joint, and the broken bone returns into place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then she places poultices on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, they gently massage the joint to facilitate it, then drain the urine, return to the previous position, and then return to their initial posture.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the joint's opening a tube made of cane; then insert the whole bladder into the joint, and slowly blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the joint, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with a poultice and left for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is cracked, then administer for its restoration and healing the same thing we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not overlooked in these proximal fractures, which rarely occur, especially to those who have little knowledge or experience with this my book; for that fracture signals to you in the greatest dispositions for direct restoration and stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's leg when it is cracked, take a hot compress from above and place it on the leg; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are fractured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture, especially if the bone is large, as in the thigh or any similar bone, to cauterize it immediately if the conditions of flebotomy allow it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection spreads to the blood, then you must cauterize it as quickly as possible by applying pressure with a clean cloth, while also elevating the affected area if possible.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture as soon as possible on that same day, and do not delay it, if otherwise there is a risk of gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess forms cautiously, leave its restoration within the ninth day, until the abscess is healed, and do not approach it on the third day or at any time afterward, as you may cause further complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone breaks and is prominent in an exposed wound, cover it to prevent further damage and use your fingers or tools with ease and minimal extension to reduce the bone and stabilize the area.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is beyond your preparation and the condition of it requires your personal tools, then reduce it using those tools, a device made of metal with a length of approximately seven or eight digits (possibly referring to a tool's size), and its width according to the amount of damage; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have on hand three or four such instruments of varying sizes for treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And both should be done with minimal force to prevent any further damage during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is of great importance to examine the extremity where the pain is most severe; and pull it firmly from above, stretching it outward from the inside towards the outside.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "volent labre" or "hernial aperture" in Greek, indicating a small opening.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the part where the acute extremity is elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it pushes inward as soon as the bone returns, and should be wrapped with some bandage.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore, you should wrap the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not take the instrument for good purchase, then you must insert the tip of that bone within it before the instrument can grasp it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot return the bone to its proper position, then cut away that part which is obstructing it using scissors or saw in whatever way you can.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then, take hold of the one that is rooted in the bony roughness and with small cracks.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned to its place and the hernia is reduced, if it causes violent pain, you will know that the bone has not been restored to its natural position; and then do this so as to bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once you have completed the restoration of the bone, immerse a black healing cloth in vinegar and, especially in summer, do not place any oil or other substance on the wound to prevent putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply stems at the appropriate time during the complete restoration of the bone, and leave the wound exposed so that you can incise the abscess with scissors and use wraps according to the extent of the abscess.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to aggravate the abscess with the fracture, as you have seen that foolish doctors often cause this by making mistakes on their patients, leading to death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unclean.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the abscess is slightly closed, soft, different from the other fractures' tightness.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the abscess is large or a bad abscess, and you are concerned about these accidents which we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that place, do not press on it, but rather wrap it with a hard cloth instead of bandages and tighten it around those areas.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the illness has begun, one or two days later, and pain is generated in it, you remove from them the cloth that you had placed over that affected part, and then administer certain remedies, which by our custom are used to treat these illnesses, such as tetracycline and similar substances.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is appropriate for you to wash the wound and consider the illness each day and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus runs from it to the parts beyond with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the illness passes many days and is not consolidated nor does the pus leave the affected limb, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to contain the illness.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, some are separated and removed, while others are not separated and involve placing the member in a position that causes pain; you should incise them as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, it is a sign of infection or putrefaction, then you must apply whatever is suitable for its cure, which is preceded by a description in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning that in which I must speak and you present your case: when the fracture is severe, it protrudes from the member, resembling those of the thigh and its muscles, and does not show any attraction to touch, nor should you attempt to extract it, for it may cause death after several attempts; leave it as it is until it heals on its own, which can take up to twenty days or more; and treat the wound if you see it, otherwise leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	**On the cure for inflammation that occurs at the site of a fracture.**
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motas observed accidents occur during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is hindered by the shape of the member; thus, it prevents the member from its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the displacement is recent and administer those medicines that have stopped it thus far, such as aloe, mint, and similar herbs; take some or all of these, and apply those with a stiptic quality, or albumen from chicken, or agrestive (sour) herbs, and rest the affected area in a compress, and constrict those around it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And note that the compression should not be loosened for several days; then loosen it and apply another, as long as the displacement persists; or place a plate of lead over it, as lead has the property of reducing all swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the displacement has already occurred and the member is in a state of contraction due to necessity, then cut it off above the healthy part, incise the superflous or prominent, or remove it entirely as soon as possible; and tend to that until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of a fracture, once it is healed, then the delicate member should be wrapped gently according to its natural shape.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member is gently wrapped, it should not be done for frivolous reasons: among which one is the abundance of solution to the ligament and the binding of the fracture, not according to what is needed; or because of excess stiffness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or due to excessive swelling; or because of superfluous movement at the wrong time; or because of a constriction of blood in the body of the patient, and for the debility of the member.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to restrict the patient's diet and make their heart tender so that the blood is multiplied in it; and apply baths; and insert gauze and joy into it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place your hand over the member, so that the pressure draws to it the necessary nourishment, or continue applying moisture with lukewarm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the healing of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of covering them is prohibited.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its crookedness and protrusion from the bone fracture and bending should be pursued, and this is how the shape of the member is adjusted; however, the member is not prohibited from undergoing its natural operation, as long as you receive the advice of one who considers that member newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Indeed, there have been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is most reprehensible, losing much fear the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If recent claudication and nodation are present, it is necessary to immerse them in warm water containing herbs that soften the joints, such as althaeas, nettles, melilots, and similar plants; apply a softening plaster to them, prepared well with linseed oil; or take mucilage from nettle roots and apply it wrapped in wool or olive oil, or use plasters of fat figs pressed between columbar leaves, which are like those called 'amerments' for strengthening bones.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes, it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction applied to the most moist parts, and exercise of the limb should be administered at regular intervals throughout the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has progressed and is firm and twisted, becoming a stone, and its removal by surgical means is necessary, then it is necessary to drain the pus that has collected on the surface of the bone, and the continuation of bone decay must be stopped; incise what remains superfluous from the joint of that member with delicate bonesaws, and administer relief to it through rest and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the condition where one of the body's joints becomes dislocated, preventing any movement, distorting the shape of the limb, and causing severe pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when any dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible; if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, if it is not reduced immediately when the joint becomes stiff, spasms and severe pain occur in the affected area.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this occurs, you should perform flailotomy on the patient and place something between the dislocated joint to relieve the stiffness; then immerse the affected limb in warm water and oil, and reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every part should be treated with the remedy of which the recollection will come to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the parts of the dislocation as previously mentioned in the fracture; from the upper part of the body, it enters the lower part of the body.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated without fracture, the dislocation of both occurs in two ways: either they are pulled out of their place by a slight movement and become slightly relaxed; or they are entirely dislocated and distorted, so that saliva from the injury escapes, and neither can keep them open nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own without a significant cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to apply gentle reduction of the dislocated part as soon as possible without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's head, and the physician inserts his thumb into the jaw joint gap of the dislocated mandible inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and all other digits outside which correspond to them; and orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax until they return to their proper place; and the physician similarly holds the mandible and gently manipulates it until it returns to its location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are simultaneously dislocated, then evaporation therapy with water and oil should be applied until a gentle reduction of both can be achieved without delay in reducing either one.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when we return and find them equally engorged, with the mouth of the hernia closed and not relieved, then place a layer of cerated cloth over those parts, and apply it with wax and gently rubbed oil; and afterwards treat them with ease and gentle bindings.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient with the hernia sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not strain either to the right or left; and do not force any further cause; having fed them well, wait until the pains are relieved and the jaws unclenched, then let them eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or exhaling until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places, then fevers often occur along with persistent vomiting, and severe pain is felt in the patient's stomach; and they often expel pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and you will often see the man who has suffered from this in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	**Chapter 25**
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	**On Reducing Dislocated Furcula and the End of Muscle**
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from its place within the thigh by its attachment to the leg; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outside joint, and this is evident from the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then you close the area with your palm tightly, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply pressure to that dressing and compress it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Apply the edge of that which is dried on the thigh, and continue it to that same area, without being dislocated on any day; then cover that it be reduced and enclosed as we have said and as it is in your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to that dressing, and compress it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this method of treatment, the healing is reduced when the extremity of the muscle is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, one of which is dislocation at the attachment to the bone on the far side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the attachment from its muscle, and this is done carefully; and it is not dislocated at the attachments behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out at the attachments on the far side after the tendon, especially in those where there are few muscles, it is slightly dislocated; but in those where there is a lot of muscle, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from sudden percussion or impact, and the muscle of the affected part is quickly inflamed, and it becomes paralyzed due to what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then understand that your strength enters where you are overstretched by it, and then you proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips from its place; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, since you find diversity among them manifest; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and leave the tendon slipped after touching the head of the muscle thus as if it were a hook, and the patient cannot return their hand to its normal position, nor limit that movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated at the foot or in its vicinity, and you find a clear sign of injury, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, gentle reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the attendant raises his hand onto the parts above; and he applies gentle pressure to the patient's thigh, strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the attendant raises his hand and extends it over; and then he releases it so that it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, what we have said does not return, and only the beginning of how the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water and administered drugs that soften and relax as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then return the patient to their back and place them on the edge of their thigh, waiting for the mix of relaxation and tension, and the doctor applies his hand over the wait, raises the head of the muscle with strength, pulls the patient's limb so that it is not hurt by the parts below, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it is not hurt by the parts below, as it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and so make present a man who is taller than the hernia, and stand on that side, and insert his muscle between the hernia's touch and raise the hernia's touch away from its place beneath until the hernia is suspended in the air, and then pull the hernia's hand away from its parts below the abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else causes it to be suspended, so treat it carefully, for once the dislocation returns, it may become more serious.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in another way: take a long stick with the head of which is rounded like a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the hernia; so that when you rest its head on drape lions, the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand from him to the other part, and strengthen the other part, for the joint returns to its place at great speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, use this remedy: take a stick of a length equal to two arms' span and a thickness of four digits, and shape it in the form of a tiny bow.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then cover the head with a round cloth to prevent the stick from causing harm.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place yourself under the stick holding the hernia, and stretch your hand or arm over it, covering the stick with your fingers, while keeping the other hand on the support and the arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place your arm on a scale at the appropriate width, stretch your hand towards the opening, and let the other side hang freely from the opposite end, so that the joint can be adjusted within a moment.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is complete according to any manner possible for you, and you see that there is a cessation of the tickling sensation from the excessive quantity of wool; then prepare a plaster with powder from mills mixed with egg albumen over all the muscle, thus ensuring it is thoroughly spread out, and tighten the tickling with a decent compression; and let the ligament be turned over onto the plaster, and attach the patient's hand to the collar, and leave it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to restrict the patient's food intake slightly, as long as the member is comfortable, for it aids in the healing of the condition.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then provide the patient with more food after seven or five days, and then exercise movement; and if it stops hurting and does not become worse, know that healing has occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to excessive humidity or any other cause, then it should be treated with a cautery of three parts, as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and pressure are reduced on him several times, but it is not fixed and he cannot raise that arm away from his body, then you know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In the case of dislocation, you must first reduce the foot and ankle or the back parts, by applying pressure and extending the muscles, until it returns to its original position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the same treatment should be applied to any other tight areas, and care taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes severe in the affected member and delayed in its movements, then the disease uses frequent baths until the gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated completely, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch, according to how the figure is dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated hip joint, it becomes manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it move its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should also consider that once the dislocation has occurred and become chronic, its reduction becomes more difficult, especially if it is in the rear parts, for this type of dislocation is the most difficult of all and causes the greatest pain, often resulting in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that his hand be extended in two directions, and his arms expanded, and the attention of the doctor be on the hip and over him, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending his hand with his other hand, until it strikes the hip with the tip of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then apply violent extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and they hold this extension with two assistants so that it is not weakened during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long, folded cloth over his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it so that these causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return. And then he gently manipulates and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then reduce the hernia so that it is held in place over the mass in which there is stiffness and the execution of albumin of egg, and be extracted by loosening the descent, and the arm be suspended from the collarbone, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament of it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strained, then repeat the bandage and ligament, and leave that for some days until it is extracted; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of a joint and its disposition is in motion, then administer humidification in a bath and subtle friction, and consider, as long as it is relieved; or rest on the affected joint, if it's a matter of excessive movement; and apply compression, leaving that over the bone during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply pressure, and immerse that in a bath; when it subsides, rub the joint with gentle friction, repeating over the affected area as many times as necessary to stop the movement, once, twice, thrice, etc.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in immersion in bath, until it is calm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a warm, moist compress on the split of the cow, and wrap it tightly; do this several times, as that is moistening and returning to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow, it is concerning the joint that connects the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In cases where the hand is dislocated, its reduction upon dislocation is delicate, unlike other joints, yet it is crucial to act swiftly in reducing it as soon as it is dislocated, lest the location become inflamed or develop an abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	In reducing the dislocation of the elbow, you place the patient's hand on a table and gently extend their arm; the physician then places his or her hand or palm over the joint, pushing it back to its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered that if the palm has already been injured, then the patient places their back on a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurred previously behind the hand, then the patient's arm should be positioned intrinsically over the table for the physician to grasp the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore return as soon as possible, which is good; otherwise, strengthen that compress gently, give time, and let it be; for if you do not, the patient will not bear or allow further reduction of the hernia for several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the Roman joint should be treated according to its mobility; do not consider any cause of the disease other than that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and it is only by cauterization near their attachment and strongly securing them that you can give any relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, once the patient's condition improves, place the compress we prepared and let it rest and tighten for several days; then relax and let it rest, and exercise your hand over the area.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the hernia is stopped and no gravity occurs, apply gentle pressure with water and friction a few times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the joints become completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated on the back of the hand or in the palm, you should squeeze it and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, provided it returns to its normal position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the joint's head, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and stretch it until it is correctly aligned on the same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to the aforementioned method, hold it in that position, continuing to stretch it during the day and exercising with movements, and hold it in the night; do this for several days until it is completely straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it appear as if this is what happened, if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and connect those parts together and perform the first operation on it, provided that it heals properly.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it appear as if this is what happened when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocated spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae of the back or neck, and it remains in an incorrect position, it is not curable, for death often follows for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the management of the patient's condition is outside their control, and they cannot hold it; sometimes, the limbs of the patient become limp or both legs or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra becomes dislocated, because sometimes it is dislocated and sometimes it is removed from its four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that one is thoroughly cleaned from behind and is named peritonitis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for it is that you must consider whether the peritonitis occurred due to childhood, because in those cases there is neither cure nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where pain occurs from an accident or impact or similar to these, the ancients spoke of lengthy treatment methods, of which the greatest benefit returns; but you have already been briefly treated of that which requires little excuse due to its excessive nature, by my close proximity to understanding, which I have here exposed and formed from various tools of which I will now demonstrate and space out this treatment.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in peritonitis which occurs due to an opening in the foot, there is neither cure nor healing for it; similarly, in cases where it is done at two seams.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except those that occur in the back itself due to what you have mentioned.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the illness has spread over its face, extending from one side to the other of the body, and it causes great pain so that the patient's hands cannot be moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick is placed, stopping at the ground at the end of the patient's foot around their head, and another stick holds their feet in the other extreme of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the stick, but it should not be buried in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then they wrap around the patient's head and gently pull the hair, binding it with a strap; and extend the end of the strap to the stick that is against their head, and fasten it to that; and tighten the other strap over their hips, holding their legs, and adjust all the straps, tying them to the other stick which is against their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then apply the case with the extension of the ligament to the root of the bone, and let not the two bones and the ligaments in their places where they are fixed be damaged, but nevertheless they are not firmly held as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is three arm-lengths, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is closest to the disease a place where the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pushes strongly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open it again with your hand; and since you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of the punch with two fists, the length of each being a arm's length, and place their head in the back of the punch exactly with two fists; and let the distance between each fist be a palm, and already there is a trace made in each fist where it turns, and each should be firmly stopped on the ground so that no more harm occurs.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another fist around which the turn is made, and twist it in both directions of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a trace where the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm in what is twisted; and the other two fists are similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot at the trace where their head is placed, and the ligaments you have straightened on their body in the turn that is to be made for their legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you must take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies the same procedure as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is marked, then apply a compress of dry, clean cloth, and stop; then place a second compress on top of it from a table, whose width should be three or four times the area of redness, and its length should cover the affected spot of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then, using the method we have mentioned, apply a light diet with delicate foods to ensure it is healing.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered through a long course, as we have recommended; these are usually given orally and include a thin layer of lead applied to the affected spot.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there occurs an imminent danger at the rear of the spine bones, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you must immediately protect from this medical treatment, as it will strongly cause death to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Capitol .xxxi.**
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the hip joint and the muscle joint should not be dislocated so easily, and it only happens to those who experience other joints with minor displacement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: within the joint itself, or outside of it, or in front of it, or behind it.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated within the joint itself, and rarely in front of or behind it.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of a dislocated hip within the joint is that when you adjust the patient's leg with the affected hip, it feels longer, and the pain is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot flex their foot normally; here the limb is stuck in a curved position, and you can see the bent knee from the side (apostat).
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation is when parts are separated outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of one who suffers dislocation to the front parts is when the leg expands completely but still causes severe pain in that area, and if it pierces through to the outside and cannot be moved forward; then the patient's urine becomes retained and their testicles become swollen, and you must move the patient's leg over the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of one who suffers dislocation to the back parts is that they do not expand the leg, nor can they bend it in front of where the pain is, and the patient's leg becomes shorter than the other, their testicles become softened, and the head of the affected area points to that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the symptoms of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and long-standing, that it has already been treated by itself or by your own administration with rest and according to its disposition; therefore, it does not require further treatment for a complete cure.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place it on that where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you cut to it as you return the joint and stretch it inward and outward, and turn it to the right and left, for it returns strongly and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the joint farthest away, or attach a strap or something similar over the leg; another minister should extend your hand over the area so that he places his fingers between the toes of the patient; and near the base of the thigh, tighten the strap with another minister holding the end of the strap.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the leg or the inner part to angulate the joint at the fork's part, or from the rear part to the front of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And make the extension of all these at once, as long as the patient's pain is elevated to their chest and their legs dangle.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this specific type of extension is especially common to all four (parts/extremities).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding its treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the parts (of the body), the patient should be turned onto their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the root of the thigh in the area between the head of the thigh and the place where the pain radiates; and finally, extend the ligament above the part of the angle to the highest point of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another assistant should firmly hold the patient's arms, press the swollen part of the affected thigh, and extend it outside forcefully for extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this particular type is of a lighter cure which reduces this member more than others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from you and you do not obey the treatment of this particular type of cure at all, then know that both feet of the patient must be tied together lightly, with a ligature, on both the toes and both the soles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of its parts is by the amount of four times, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is the amount of two bras.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong youth to cut off the top of the hernia, and hang it from another youth, and the other youth should reduce the hernia with strong pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation in the outward part, it is necessary to keep the patient in a posture as we have recommended in its immobility; and the ligament should be tightened on the affected thigh specifically and also on the patient's chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two fists should be placed, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and they should be held firmly with fists adjusted at the middle of the legs, over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the hernia is not harmed by the hand's penetration between the thighs, so you must prevent the extension to the sides from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand tightens the reduction according to art (or skill).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey reversely, it will be of great benefit; otherwise, hold diligently on that which we have said in immobility through that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient lies on their sides comfortably.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then with his other hand, he pulls towards him, and at this moment, he holds the extended part of the limb on the opposite side.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not let the patient extend the limb towards the front, but rather elevate it above the ground; once you have ensured that it rests on a firm surface, as we mentioned regarding the position of the body when an ankle joint is dislocated outward, and according to what we said about extending the limbs and ligaments, there should be no further harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, after the reduction is complete according to what covers—and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, since you extend from the wound two legs, and when you see those nails and the patient extrudes their leg and you expand that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to what covers has returned—and now you arrange two things and place a bandage and extrude a dressing so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those nails in front of you, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the patient leave.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and apply that dressing again, and pull it out according to your initial stretch, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then, after that, he should be made to walk slowly for some days until he is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint (denolh) is dislocated in three ways: when it is out of place at the sides, within (dedintz), or in front (dejos mays) of its normal position, but not when it is displaced behind (detras).
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a joint's dislocation is that the patient applies their leg to the affected area; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of the joint in all ways is that you make the patient cease their movement directly, if possible; hold their two legs against their chest, and rest their foot between their thighs; then carefully adhere to the joint with your palms, and tighten them between your fingers over the joint of the patient until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its release is that the leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then wrap those parts with bandages for three or four days, and afterwards remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the afflicted limb for walking for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer a strong extension to the limbs whose use was previously mentioned in the treatment of the hernia described above.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter XXXIII**
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	**On the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation**
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot, at times, is deformed by slight removal, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either inside or outside the joints.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen, proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for the dislocation is of quick relief, and it consists in gently reducing it to its place and immobilizing it until it heals.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to stop the harm right away, and have a strong and capable helper pull from behind at the middle part of the foot in its proper place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then take your right hand and raise the foot from the superior part, and with your left hand, gently pull from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left, for two strokes, extend it; push the toe of the foot towards the bed on the right side where the leg is working.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot towards the bed on the third stroke, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one stroke or two according to this manner, and you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again, as that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and stretch a firm cloth between their thighs, and wrap them in a blanket so that the hernia does not slip out.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the first line translated: And now the attending practitioner holds the patient's limbs, and another practitioner stretches the foot with their hands or with the bandage that lies on the top of the foot; and another extends each of these practitioners against the extension of the leg, and the padding between the thighs of the patient retains them, so that the matter of it is not pulled to the sides beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the next line: And the physician adjusts the dislocation with their hands, and another practitioner holds the healthy limb on either side, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction is healthy, then apply a plaster and reinforce those bindings strongly, and tie the foot with bindings to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be mindful of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the binding over those is not violent and injures it severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then place a bandage over it for two days or three; if the inflammation subsides, remove the bandage.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then, on the third day or the fourth, remove the bandage; forbid the patient from movement for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If, against the doctor's advice, the patient must move and reopen the space, there is a risk that the dislocation will not heal properly, leading to further complications.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms, then apply what we have described regarding the treatment of pain and inflammation in another part of the body, as long as it is not against the course of treatment previously outlined.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the feet's joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Know that one who is dislocated should be gently pulled to a certain extent in its treatment; and what is not difficult, it will heal quickly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some sensitive part of the foot, then you should cease the patient's pain by placing their foot on a level surface or table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you should stand by the foot, place your own foot on what threatens the joints, gently press it until the dislocation returns, and ensure that what was dislocated is now aligned and does not reappear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then you should place a board under the patient's foot that takes the entire foot, with two ends, and gently but firmly hold it in this position for three days; after that, you should remove the board and allow the patient to walk slowly for several days, until healing is complete.
Capitol .xxxv.	**Line-by-line Translation:**
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that occur due to injury or fracture or any other similar event.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur and you proceed with the treatment for it and restoration, you often witness successive cases of death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, he who presumes to cure it without understanding, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, of great experience, merciful and compassionate, should act slowly, not rashly or presumptuously; and use only gentle medications that can be easily withdrawn if necessary, leaving the judgment to divine power, unless you hope for healing from perdition, alleviation of malady, and have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, endeavor as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than to use severe cauterization.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And now, if the member returns to its proper place, then administer treatment with a mild cautery and cure the affliction with suitable drying herbs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If the dislocation is a fracture and occurs in separately broken bones, then you should drill through their joints, as we have previously mentioned regarding simple injuries of this type in the preceding locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And observe and beware, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear, as my previous teachings have warned; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, maintain your glory, and bring health to your true body in due time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, you complete the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
