Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, as you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its end and due to its expositions, explanations, and declarations, it seems to me that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the greatest operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the greatest operation, being largely neglected in our region and time due to the loss of its science and practice, only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have been distorted by subsequent errors and misunderstandings, as their intentions were closed and the power and art of it elongated.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it appears to me that you have revived the order of this treatise through its second method of exposition and declaration and abridgment; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be added to the explanations, and in preparation for them, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause why it is not possible for a good artisan to master his art in our time is that the art of medicine is intricate and requires extensive study of anatomy, understanding the growth of members, their shapes, connections, and separations; knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and their extraction; as well as an awareness of pulsing veins and static ones, and the locations where they are ejected.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, as he emphasizes in his work, especially in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already discussed this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is ignorant of what we have said about anatomy, will not be exempt from making mistakes that may lead to the death of people, as you have seen many such individuals who have been trained in this science but lack practical experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You see a foolish doctor who has incised a scrofulous abscess in the thigh of a woman and cut some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flows out, causing the woman to die from it among her possessions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who put a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state, and the stone was large, he came to him and extracted that stone with part of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for help to extract it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the disease, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who is highly paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; due to the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the wound, using poultices and bands with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then loosen it according to their desires, and apply rest, and use poultices for some days and command that we loosen the ligament; and thus also for the foot, when the pain has passed, and prevent its recurrence.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have been called to loosen the ligament, and once achieved, there is tranquility and thus an end to their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, it cannot be checked, and the corruption will not cease to spread throughout the member until the danger of the disease passes.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes an ulcer after some days, until the evil of it is multiplied under his control.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the acrid cautery is pure of melancholic humor; then it does not cover that it will reach him entirely, but rather to be in the member where it suffers most.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on the patient should be divided into two parts: one part is associated with health, and the other with risk to the most important conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where various operations are described which involve error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to pay attention to these things and to set them aside, so that the ignorant do not take them as a basis for speaking and slandering you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, abandon the terrible illnesses which are difficult to cure, and set aside your weapons that make you fear, so that your faith and your name may not fail; for greater glory remains to you, both now in this world and forever after in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Different parts of the body already dissected in some of their signs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat evil illnesses with evil remedies, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered on the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incision and piercing, and also with cupping glasses, plaisters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters are ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a carefully arranged chapter on internal foot issues and the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and the recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery youth and the documents of it is a long and prolix speech, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will relieve every kind of universal connection, whether it is of material or immaterial nature, except for two connections, which are connections having material as their cause.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the connection that is dry and has material as its cause, opinions differ; some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others say the contrary, that cautery is not appropriate for a condition caused by dryness and heat, since the nature of fire is dryness and heat, and it would be inappropriate to treat a condition that is dry and hot with a cautery that is also dry and hot.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the contrary argue that cautery is beneficial for any dry and hot condition found in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the connection of fire, you find the body of man to be harsh.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And they say, through the argument of those who hold this view, that they have already discovered this through experience in certain cases.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate that this comes to pass when someone who has already been exhausted and trained in the art of cautery for repeated practice, who knows the diversity of the composition of people and the disposition of their ailments in their bodies, the causes of those, and the accidents that befall them, and the span of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other cases, there is no cause for fear, especially in the case of painful and wet ailments, as all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree with the application of cautery to relieve them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the excellence of it, lies in cautery as a medicinal tool, for fire is simple; its action only affects the member being cauterized, without hurting other members nearby, except perhaps with a slight pain.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members where it is applied, and strongly attracts to the diseased member that is hard to heal, and strongly assists in its recovery.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Light, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather surpasses itself; it is already known to us by experience and by the long service of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not that it is hidden in my secret thoughts about light, and its quality in the operation on bodies and its expulsion of ills, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my children, that the time for cauterization and immobilization is best in the spring season.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, in order to overcome the damage caused by the passage of time with the healing that results from cauterization, and most especially when cauterization is for pains or necessary injuries, sharp and immediate, which do not suffer delay for fear of further harm, it is better to cause a lesser injury at once than to allow greater harm to occur over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so do not sit on your feet, sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who are attracted to that illness which is healed by cautery; it does not completely heal, and that complication persists.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not treated thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause that pains come about.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its strength and virtue in operation and the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some point in time, according to the constitution of the illness and the location of their affliction, and the strength of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of superfluities and humors, and what has been gained by them from food and similar causes; for the illness which cautery is administered to may be a subtle illness in few members with slight superfluities and humors, so that when cautery is performed for pain and similar symptoms as those, it is possible that that pain will not return, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is often said in popular speech that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, which is false, for those who do not understand it believe that there is no cure that profits from medicine or any other cause through cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is quite the opposite; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one applies the methods of cure to certain ailments, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, which does work for them.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the vulgar and too many of the folk physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this but because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it does not do so unless in certain bodies; cautery on that part is good and better than as they said; however, when you make a cautery with fire from gold, it is not declared to you, because the gold becomes according to the quantity you want due to the heat of the fire, and you prepare to receive friction; and if you adjust the fire upon it, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire for the craftsman to catch by the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that, cautery with iron should be made more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and you have organized those from the head down to the feet, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Using a cold and damp cautery for head pain.
Le capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moisture and cold to the affected area, which is the primary cause of many rheumatic conditions, known as 'corissa', affecting the head, neck, and ears, leading to flux, sleep disturbances, dental pain, throat issues, and generally, all ailments resulting from coldness—also causing paralysis, apoplexy, and similar symptoms in such maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization involves, first, evacuating the disease from the body using a laxative on the head for three to four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the patient's age, and their general health.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then, instruct them to shave their head and lay down on a warm bed, placing their hands on their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your palm's edge near the base of the nose between their feet.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the affected area is hard to reach, mark that spot by probing it with a pointed cautery, whose shape is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place that over the healthy area without probing, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is slowly restricted, and you remove it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then gently lift your hand and examine the area; if you already see any bones exposed, as well as some quantity of blood, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that spot, or another from that one, while it is still cold, then you should check for what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a small amount of salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the area soaked in fire, leaving that on the inside to be destroyed, the wall of fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a four-part remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the limb gets better and more youthful, so it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that some of them use cautery on the bone within the joint, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is dried up.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then clean this that is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say others use fire to reach the deepest part, strengthening the bone entirely until it does not break, and this is the way to perform this small operation:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place vapours of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is left open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not have the expertise to view these two types of cautery instruments as a whole, but according to certain people's ways of fearing; and let this be left aside, it is better for me to speak of health when it is present, because the head is exposed due to the solution of its continuity, as we have witnessed in the other members, and especially when the nature of the patient's headache is feverish.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery instrument that is used first is more safe and better for me; and from that, to that work for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in all parts of the head and this is a prolongated malady, one uses weapons, splints, compresses, emplasters, guasts, cats, and sheep, and most importantly, if the head of the malady has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not counteract any of those causes, then consider that if the nature of the malady is strong; and there is no extreme or great harm, then cauterize it with another cautery, leaving the first one a bit.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that over the edge of their head with a cautery, within which the wound is open.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the wound and expose the amount of bone we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place called 'vas', - and it is that place where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bones, for this disease causes great pain that is different from the pain of all other burns on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should apply this cautery at its proper place, for you know that the cautery which is used to burn the horns of the head and the back of the head is a milder cautery than the one which is used to burn the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capital chapters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe headache begins at the temples or there is pain within the skull, it is necessary to purify the head with medicinal remedies and also administer other treatments as I have mentioned regarding the various diseases; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization should be applied in two ways: either with acute burning medicines or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	You may use cautery or medicinal fire to take a hot piece of wood, cut it and burn the ends from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the site of pain in the temple with a scalpel, until it is felt to be deep enough, making sure it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then you should tighten it gently with a bandage for three hours; and afterwards remove the bandage, apply the remedy, and place your hand over the affected area for two or three days until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that as a poultice until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you choose to do this with some medicinal fires, as I have written in the two previous treatises on medicinal fires, then...
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Prepare the cautery according to this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the area of pain, and hold it there—so that the ark (or force) left by the cautery does not pull—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood stuck by the specific nature of the wound is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the artery left behind, then raise your hand so that the artery is not pulled and no more blood flows out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the area with salt water and place a bandage over it, leaving it for three days; then apply plenty of ointment around it, and tend to it until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, burn the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this new wound.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat a wound as we have said in the previous treatment and in the division of illnesses, and if the cure does not take effect, and the illness persists, then know that you must ignite the cautery knife until it becomes white, indicating its effectiveness on the pain's source along its length, or where it is; rest your hand for a moment and press firmly to pierce the artery and reach within the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is essential for you to prevent the mandible from further movement, as it is impaired due to chewing, and ensure that the fracture is not twisted, damaging the nerves or causing spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and vigilance against the flow of blood from an artery that is ruptured, for in the rupture of it there is fear, especially to him who ignores what he does and is not diligent or hopeful; and lets the operation begin in him at the outset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And now return to the recollection of the regimen for managing accidental arterial blood flow according to your manner in your place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to the cautery and the patient's condition is bearable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial stretch using tweezers, and this is better cauterization and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with laxatives as mentioned earlier, and if the pain persists, apply hot cautery; this is known as 'puncta', and its shape is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And the cautery point is placed near the fire, and it is moved around the entire ear as if it were turning, or in any way necessary to alleviate the pain.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Apply the cautery along the edge of the ear gradually, until the area is numbed by the heat.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied with these points over the entire ear, and when it is done, treat the areas as they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous veins that are cured and require cauterization are nothing but the species (varicose veins) that come from phlegm, as we have discussed in the divisions of ailments.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Careful cauterization is required for the species that should be treated with drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When treating that species of tortuous veins with jerks and contractions and no relief follows your treatment, you must cauterize the malady in three places: first, the base of the auricle (ear), second, a small spot on their temple, and third, the union of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And hold the hot cautery against the opposite side of the affected part, for softening occurs only in the area that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is as follows: cauterize the base of the auricle directly, placing a small amount of cautery over the forehead, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the quantity of heat from the cautery is sufficient for the nature of the condition.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it is specifically a type of cutting tool, whose shape lies flat on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness in its use.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then be careful to care for the area that has been treated until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and its treatment does not accord with what we have said, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first, on all the corners of their head; second, on the middle part of the head as we have said; and third, on the buttocks.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and this is more important; and then, it is treated with what you have prepared.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of an oblivion made by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient in the beginning large doses of herbs and pills, which serve to cleanse the body.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then completely shave the patient's head and place a poultice on their chest according to the description in the tractate on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if for those reasons it is good for them; otherwise, make three cauterizations to him in the last part of his head, which are descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, hold the thickness of the skin, and then carefully apply the cautery according to the procedure.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have additional aid and the patient can endure it, make the cautery on the middle part; but if you need greater assistance, cauterize both edges.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Carefully tend to the inside until it is healed; and apply the olive cautery according to the shape as previously described.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand the process in the softening of the head as we have discussed; then carefully shave the patient's head, and apply cautery in the middle part of the head with a cautery, and cauterize all the edges of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much heat and the illnesses are tolerable but the pain is severe, apply four cauteries on the spinal columns of the back, then cauterize inside until the intense pain of the patient is relieved, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then take care that it heals properly, and this should be done with olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is important to purify the patient's brain from the beginning when they have had fever and other cures that we have mentioned in the previous division where the illness is severe and there is tolerable resistance to medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not endure medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them, for several days, as a benefit from the diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that place with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of the head, and over each of the corners of the head where it was cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the disease is severe and resistant, then apply cautery as follows, having a paralytic and softening effect on the body over the spinal columns of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply gentle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then it is necessary to give him something that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, make a slight cut on the circle (scalp) with a proper knife, and then press it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel relieved, and held from every side.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a remedy; it is more worthy to be used before sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a gentle warmth for a measured time, which gives relief when it is most needed.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take that one in the middle part of the head of the patient in the circle and loosen it so that it becomes chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, following his diet until he is healed; or if you prefer, apply points with a small cautery according to what is most suitable for him, as long as you have your hand on such an instrument: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that cloth soaked in the border or in gray of gullina.
Capitol .xii.	**Capital XII.**
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the extraction of water from the kidney.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you recognize the onset of water in the kidney through the signs mentioned in the previous division, it begins and causes the patient to drink water that purifies the head, and attention should be paid to complete hydration.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And do that soaking in a bath with herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to wash their head and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize with two irons over two temples if it is the onset of water in two kidneys, or one side if it is the onset of water in one kidney.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterizes should be at that length in the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further medication that is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to possess knowledge that is derived from arteries and the removal of those, as well as the prevention of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauteries, thereby producing a certain effect.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	**On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears**
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are chronic and through veins and arteries that appear in the external manifest location of the head, it is determined that this is a result of dilated blood vessels, then cauterize that part with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting hot water compresses in the eyes, and apply a cautery in the middle location of the head and two cauterizations at the base of the skull where there are two temples, and two cauterizations at the base of the skull between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize that across the entire surface of the coa (liver) area on the extremity of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat a patient as we have described in the previous section and your treatment does not benefit them, then prepare and make the patient drink certain herbs for three nights; and shave their head, and apply a cautery with a middle-sized cautery made of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply the cautery to that, using a claved cautery on each of the two eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the form of this claved cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening cautery of the eyelids for the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid using this claved cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply the cautery to both eyelids with a small claved cautery across each, and they should be elongated from the tempora.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the hernia.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhering.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI.**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and press on the eye, apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inside out and press on the eye, apply cautery to them in two ways: either by making incisions or by using a medicinal fire.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a fire cautery, command the patient to look away from it as it cuts its hairs, ensuring they do not catch fire; and if you must hold them down, tighten the bandages around their eyes until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore as they are cleaned and dried, then place the patient's head in a low position, and carefully examine the socket of his eye, signaling it according to the shape of a dead leaf, and begin at the sign closest to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply some wet, white wax or a mucus of bird down to the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery whose shape is like this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize along the shape that has been signaled, little by little, in repeated passes, until the surface of the wound is completely covered, just as if it were with a sheet of myrtle, clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of the health of the treatment is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of the eye raised up since the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so lift your hand and place it there for three days, then return to the side with the border until the pain is gone.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply care to that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery over that just as you had done originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hairs do not grow back.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But with cautery and medicated fire, these are the commands you give to the patient that the hairs become prolonged and healed, and then make a bandage in the shape of a fir tree leaf from cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a known soap and a living fire, mix these causes together, and make it into a paste so that it is not cold; spread this from it over the paper which is made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one or both wounds; leave the wound edge bathed in an albumen of egg, and the patient's head in the hot air.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And now let me speak of the medicine, and apply it gently, lest the patient feel the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as you continue with this, you must observe if the patient perceives the bite of the medicine; if they do, cease the medicine and apply it again later, but in a milder way; then, when the bite has ceased, wash the wound with water. And consider how often the eyelid is lifted, just as it is cleaned daily by fire or incision, as this is important; and if it does not return to the application of the medicine at the site where the medicine was not absorbed properly, it will undermine your operation and cause the wound to contract.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the affected area until the pain of the adhesion is eradicated, and treat it with a defusing ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with great care so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if after a few days the eyelid becomes softened due to any cause from the hair in the socket, then apply your medicine again to that area which has become softened from the eyelid, and indeed just as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men vary in size and shape, and therefore your treatment should be adapted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let the path of correction not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of the fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method we have described for the division of ailments and your treatment does not succeed, then know that you should cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to sit with their head inclined towards the side, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is not hurt or agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then apply a hot compress or a paste of alum and chickpea flour on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then prepare the cautery, which is shaped as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, just like a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to get out this way with an attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet he who is experienced is better at the work of healing.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from that.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over it the hot cautery, and with your hand protect the part from the heat of the cautery at the beginning of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and apply the cautery on the hairy parts of the nose and burn that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of applying the hot cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery one or two more times, as necessary; leave it in place for three days, and then apply a compress with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply the sharp, corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and treated as appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	There is another way to treat fistulas, which some masters also use: enter the site of the fistula and close it; then place your hand over that fissure gently, in the shape it has, and pour a quantity of melted lead there; hold your hand firmly but do not harm the patient with it so that the melted lead does not burn the patient's skin; cover the area where you have applied the lead to the fistula site with white cloth or water, for the lead will adhere to the site of the fistula and heal it through a miraculous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the body according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of the Hernia**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Mouth injuries often cause fissures in the lips, especially in children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a small knife to make a cut as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and the depth of the cut according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your finger carefully in those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully remove that compress when it has healed.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of an uvula, or in the palate or in the roots of teeth there is an abscess that is broken and ancient, and a fistula remains, and if you treat it but do not complete the healing process, then know that you must apply a cautery according to the amount received by the fistula. Place the ignited iron into the opening of the fistula, and with your finger, bring it to the deepest part, doing this once or twice; then care for it as we have said regarding treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus, if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and host the corrupted bone as described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX:**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are decayed, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then the patient's head should be placed on the thigh, and the shape of the cautery should be adapted so that you place the flame over the tooth, inserting the burning cautery into it, holding it very close to achieve the desired effect without causing excessive pain.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which they should spit it out, for the decayed tooth will be held firm, the softened gum will tighten, and the corrupt moisture will be dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is a frost or worm in it, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery is performed on that part in two ways: either with a cow's hair cautery or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow's hair involves taking a strand of cow's hair and twisting it in a funnel-shaped form, then grasping it and wrapping it around the upper part of the tooth, immersing it in hot oil, and applying it to the aching tooth until it is numbed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or piece of cloth in the wound on that side, place it over the aching tooth, and place the burning iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization is to address the wound of iron or hot metal, and it should be done gently in the heart of the wound, ensuring that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; repeat this several times as the pain may resurface on the same day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide, holding the cautery for an hour and then spitting it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery as you have managed to do according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of extrophules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophules are filled with flecma and cold humors that are resistant to digestion by medicines, and you wish to drain them slightly, then apply the cautery in a way that follows their shape, having two hollowed ends so that the fire of the cautery can enter from one end and exit from the other. Once this is achieved, place the burning end over the affected area once, or as many times as necessary, until it reaches the depth of the extrophule.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, then bandage it for three days and keep pressure on the affected area until the swelling has subsided from where the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the appropriate treatment with ointments and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the catheter or the cautery at such is to convey.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of raw and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the surface of the lung, especially when it is chilled by congestion, it is necessary to evacuate the illness at the beginning with medicinal laxatives, and then cauterize that part of the throat where the infection has occurred.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to burn the skin with the cautery or dislocate the patient's bones, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery as needed at the joint of the neck on the last spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of the spine is done in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of what has been described above until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for lung maladies and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung maladies are caused by excess humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an ancient malady, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with a cautery over the furcula in the places where the lungs shake and rise; and another cautery in the middle of the foot between the big toe and the next toe; and both cauteries should be done as described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the pointed cautery called a point, the shape of which precedes the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make incisions within these; then carefully tend to that area with the remedies that precede its healing.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that area; once, you can make three incisions according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the titillitis, which is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not held in place during its return, you should reduce its dislocation until it is in its usual position, then place the patient on their back or side; and raise the limb that was displaced from within the thigh towards the upper parts above with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two points; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will appear when using three cautery points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it is so subtle according to the quantity of attempt; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that's how the cauterizations are made.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the entire cautery over the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then make a cauterization over the muscle with a hot cautery or a pointed cold cautery, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dried up, and the illness is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	**On the Cauterization of the Stomach.**
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When inflammation of the stomach occurs and moisture fills a space within that extends from its opening, and if you continue with treatment methods without considering this, then know that the illness will weigh heavily on the patient's back, spreading to their limbs and organs, and it is appropriate to cauterize these three places: first, leave a mark on the foot with a single cautery as thick as a finger; second, make two cauteries on each side of the back at the costates, forming a triangular shape; and stretch between those that are not properly aligned, which will cause decay.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery at the middle point of the stomach in this shape; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it according to the desired amount of cautery, and then cauterize those points; and afterward, care for the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of varicose veins.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein ends due to cold, or moisture, or excessive windiness occurs, and the disease is treated as we have said, and it does not subside, then know that the disease must be lifted over its base, and three cauterizations should be made according to this form and with this amount on the vein beneath the hipbones, so the patient lies in the supine position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cauterization should be according to its thickness, and the cauterizations themselves should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not apply the hot cautery directly to your skin.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of this (substance) that is adhered corresponds to the quality of the specific kind of kidney stone, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the illness stands on the feet of the patient; or if it is not standing, then it sits, which has already spread its things and raised its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with this cautery, you can cauterize with a cut-edge cautery, when it is in your subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to over-process the cauterization, and let the specific nature of all the kidney stones adhere so that everything in the body is affected and reaches the intestines, because the kidney stone here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you wish to determine whether it is within the muscle or around it, if it is within the muscle, the patient experiences severe pain and swelling.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is around the muscle, the pain is intense and various doctors may have already attempted to treat it without success.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, he should consider how the disease is affecting its head; then he should feel the place of the abscess; and next, apply the cautery which resembles a wedge, whose shape was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize that cautery until all the wound is healed, so it reaches the bone, and it becomes clean.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of that one for the healing of other hernias until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And use only those cauterization techniques that are described in the study of medicine, and most importantly, those which have proven effective in treating various ailments; however, this may be daring for this operation, but it is better to follow those guidelines.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cautery of the pleural fever is said to be performed by applying this method: take a long, thin, pointed cautery from the school of Aristology, and it should be of the thickness of the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and apply heat to it, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizations beneath guiding them slightly towards the part where the beard is left, and two cauterizations sloping between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations in the back parts; and a cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but let it be visible on the body in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also speak of ancient practices that are similar to men using hot iron cauterization, burning and applying this to the area between the ribs, in order to reach that apostema (a medical term for a specific point) and ensure health, as we have said regarding the apostema of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Do not be afraid to use this cautery in such an incision, for it often happens at the site of the fistula where there is no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing some context. The reference to "Capitol .xxx." suggests a possible connection to a legislative or governmental document, but without additional information, I cannot offer a precise translation or interpretation. If this is part of a larger text, providing more context would be helpful for accurate assistance.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the pain of the bowels with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your cure, use cautery on it according to three methods, all of which are correct; one is to make three or four punctures along the length of the bowel according to the shape of the cauterization marks on the leg.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of cauterization is the same manner we have said regarding the cauterization marks on the leg entirely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand to the cautery; the illness should be on its side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is when you ignite the cautery having two points, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and raise the cord which is in the right side of the bowel where it bears the weight of the illness on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation, by which you lift the spine according to the length of the body, so that cauterization is made according to the extent of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then properly insert the two instruments, with hot words, into that space where those penetrate the spine from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then properly take care of the cauterizations so that they do not become inflamed for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but directly to the infected tissue.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating dropsy using the methods we have discussed, if your treatment does not improve the condition, you should apply cauterization in four places around the affected area, and also apply a cautery to the stomach, another to the thigh, another to the ribcage, two between the spinal columns of the back, one directly on the right foot, and another over the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then apply the cautery gently so that it does not burn for too long.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the hernia from treatment with cautery alone, but add to it two intentions, and it will be celebrated with aid in healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be in the form of a claw according to its previous shape, and it is that which is cauterized on the back is an olive according to the shape that precedes it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and parts (of the body).
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in water and filled with amber liquid, cauterize the foot on the back of the ankle, between the big toe and the little finger, without touching these joints, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand even higher, and do not return it to its original position until the amber liquid has drained.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cautery according to this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs, and on each cut make a hot cautery with the end of the cutting instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on both sides and the other in the middle part of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And the wound should remain open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then cure those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: "xxxiii" likely indicates the chapter number, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to cold and moisture, it is the digestive and retentive virtue that becomes inflamed, which are found in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with methods of cure without causing any harm, and sometimes patients who suffer from severe pain undergo hot applications of virtues, then a large cautery is applied over their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, or circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtle circuit, or a fine-pointed cautery; also cauteries on the acidic over the great alkalines, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excessive moisture and the illness tolerate it, then apply a cautery over the anus and intestines, tightly binding two cauteries close to the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for young people from which one does not stray.
Capitol .xxxiv.	**Chapter .XXXIV.**
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	**On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.**
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When hemorrhoids of ancient origin or a thick humor or corrupt humidity are present and treated as mentioned in the previous sections, but the natural cure does not take effect, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus around the small of the back, and with a cautery on the navel for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If it appears that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digesting well, and their face becomes pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; also apply a cautery to the tongue, and another cautery to the patient's chest with a clavicle cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then dress them until they heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems like the text provided is a collection of medical procedures without context or full sentences, making it difficult to provide an accurate translation. The references to "joint pain," "hernia," "emorroydas," and cautery suggest treatments for various ailments common in medieval medicine. 
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cautery for hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove hernias, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that flame into the removed hernia, and finish with your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then treat those with hot compresses until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so gently.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Chapter XXXVI** (Note: The numbering seems to be out of context, as it doesn't match the previous text structure. Assuming "Capitol" refers to a chapter in the treatise.)
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, then it is healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is ancient, filled with corrupted humidity, it is then most fitting to attempt to heal it gently, and accordingly, one should try to understand the quantity of the depth of the fistula as indicated by the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Nearby, the cautery should be like a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intersects the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of burning nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be vigilant of all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and all foreign matter has been removed from it and it heals thus for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the foreign matter is not from its place, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting its position, and it falls to those causes of which there will be remembrance in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the ulcers there is pain due to cold or excessive ventilation, and for this reason the posture of the patient becomes deformed, then it is necessary to cauterize those over the ulcers with a cautery on each ulcer, using a clavicle from which relief is sought.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we strongly cauterize according to a slight space, so that there will come three layers of healing, and thus they will be later in recovery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the illness cannot retain urine, apply a hot iron to the opening where it discharges over the bladder; the hairs of the penis begin to fall out, and cauterize with an iron on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the severity of the pain; apply a cautery at the lower part of the back, or use two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the iron should be struck as it is required.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter XXXIX** (Note: The number is written in Roman numerals, indicating the chapter's position.)
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	**On the Cauterization of the Major Blood Vessels** (Translation of the heading.)
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When fever and excessive moisture appear, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstruation becomes corrupt, making it difficult to induce labor, and pain occurs during childbirth, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; or with two cauteries, one on each side, using a clavel-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of ankw (hip) dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus infiltrates the hip joint and causes its dislocation, and this condition is characterized by one leg being prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the area of the dislocation is compressed against the patient's body.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular like a ring, for you will have already tried to tighten the circumference of the opening as it is turned, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the ring.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery of which was mentioned previously, its shape is in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain from all parts of the body, and carefully tend to that which is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII (42)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower limbs, caused by friction and moisture, the treatment is with water as mentioned above, and this is ancient. You should remove the illness from the body using pills made of foul or artificial substances or similar remedies, and then apply a cautery to that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of applying the cautery in that case depends on two methods: either a cautery with medicines that burn, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two methods scientifically, of which one is to cauterize that area across the width of the leg using three triangular cauteries in this manner; and make sure they go deep enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be in proportion to the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some times, the cautery should be applied to the middle part over the root of the anus so that there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form proceeds in the cauterization of the herniated anus, one that is circular and burns away the impurity of all the surrounding tissue.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterization in chronic cases where pain is fixed to the anus and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that as two cauterizations on the thigh over the area where the pain originates; and one cauterization on the calf four days apart from the inner side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterization is with a knife, then the depth of the cauterization should be according to the amount of impurity in the tissue.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the illness spreads that the pain is extended to the point nearest the feet, then apply a cautery here where you see it with three or four or more points as needed for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the illness causes pain that seems to radiate from the side of the body, then apply a cautery here with a cuticular cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not harm nerves or cause great injury with the cautery, and thus do more harm than good to the patient from this illness.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one of those whom cauterization is performed on the ankle and completed with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated within that the tumor had achieved the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And apply a strong acidic solution of the belly, and do this for death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, apply cautery to each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And certain sages in the art of cauterization have said about the use of a pointed cautery, which is the manner of this practice: make it resemble a circular iron ring, whose circumference equals that of a palm; and its sharp edge should be according to the thickness of a date palm stem or perhaps a bit less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, another third should be drawn; and the space between them should be the thickness of a night's rest; and those circles should have two parts; and the length of those lines should be a nodus or two noduses, and make on the margin of the iron ring a proper design in the shape of the circles; this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and place it gently on the affected part, with the illness laid upon its side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize that area with three pointed cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with a poultice and leave it open for three days; apply a hot compress to it, and keep the wound uncovered for too many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my children, we have little experience with this type of cautery due to the fear surrounding it, and because few have found which ones work best over time.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Apply the best cauteries to him who suffers, and find the right place for them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The best cautery should be considered as medicine; make two circles with a perforated armature made of iron, in which the keyhole of the door is placed; let the length of the wall be such that its diameter equals the width of their [the cauteries'] handles or, if you prefer.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it equals the thickness of the finger, place cushions on both sides and ensure they hold each other in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then apply pressure to the area where the patient feels pain on their side, and take a cloth dipped in cold water, forming it into two circles, and its quality should be like fire; hold it there for an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and tightening - as if it were fire - until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the tool and remove the cold water from the affected area with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then apply this treatment for three days, and continue until the pain and swelling have subsided, and do this for several more days, as it helps to prevent future occurrences. This is best for younger patients.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make them lie in a position that retains water as it is done with a compress.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a mixture of alkali and crushed material from both sources, then place them in a new container, piercing the opening with a small tool according to the quantity that goes inside.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then place the bottom of the container in another container filled with fresh water, and add two parts of the mixture to one part of hot water, pressing it firmly with your hand, and leaving the mixture to settle into the fresh water in the other container.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewing alkali, so that it becomes a powerful healing agent, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, as fire does.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among these medicines are some that use cautery widely, thus quickly and skillfully, and mix them in such a way that they become more effective.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	A wise man from ancient times describes an operation and cure for the pain of water (edema) and sciatica, and magnifies its great benefit, saying that no other treatment is needed, as it heals completely with this method; he recommends immersing oneself in warm water to experience it immediately.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that near a certain tree (or plant), if it is not available, a fresh fig should be used; many times it is pressed against the affected area, whether in the water or on the object causing pain, or on the leg, and it should be left for some time.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the disease requires release from compression.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse him in water and, when the body is heated, insert the hot object into the sole, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not appropriate to use cautery in these remedies unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	You may already know that when the narrow vein of the foot is cauterized with a goat's blood, it benefits the patient; and the cautery should be applied to him in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes and on the sole.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dry goat's vein, inflame it over fire until it becomes carbonized, and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the pain in the joint disappears entirely.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this type of cautery is called the cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii. (This indicates the title or heading of a section in the medieval treatise.)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain. (This appears to be the topic or heading for a section discussing the treatment using cautery.)
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as injury or blow, or excessive sweating, and for similar causes, through the infusion of a cold and moist material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not help but in this sole species, which is caused by the infusion of cold and moist material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, create pills that resemble them and apply them over the area where the pain is located along three lines according to its extent, using cautery on each line as much as needed based on the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four, using the claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization begins with jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	These symptoms often first appear in small children; and the sign of the onset of this malady in children is that their joints become stiff, and elevation and movement cause them pain.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last spine of the back and the nodes of the spine that already begin to rise above the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and want to prevent it, you cauterize it with a circular cautery in the following shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery across the entire length of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be proper between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then tend to the area, ensuring it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not applied to a swelling caused by a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout is caused by cold and is not relieved by treatment, then cautery should be used to alleviate the pain.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize the proper evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot using various cautery tools.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take a olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain intensifies within the bones or other joints, and this persists frequently, then cauterize that over any joint with three or four of these pointed cauteries, using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press too hard with the cautery, merely touch the surface of the skin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain persists within the bone and its surroundings, then administer the cauteries as we have mentioned in our previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the joints, it is called arthritis; then make points along the course of the tendons as they twist, in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these joints, make points along the course of the tendons around each knot and on the pinched area of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain affects other joints or muscles, apply cautery to various parts of the body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the malady without proper treatment and reception of medications; for if good regimen is followed and the inflammation is removed with this cautery, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a chapter heading, indicating the fifty-fourth chapter.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the angles and opens hernias against the intestine at the genitals, treatment begins by returning the intestines to their place, ensuring that the patient follows a diet during his day and uses gentle means so that the wound heals from within his abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue to support the patient between your hands on his back and instruct him to keep his breath within, so that no hernia or intestine appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the patient to his original position and attempt to reduce the fracture over the bone of the thigh, marking the end of the fracture's movement by signaling its resemblance to a circle at the upper gaps of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then apply the cautery whose shape is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within which there is much heat and swelling.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protrusion.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and aim it at the bone of the big toe within the joint; repeat this another time if you do not succeed on the first attempt to hit the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the cauterization, so as not to inflame the hernia, preventing it from causing death or other serious complications on the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not apply your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And take care that the cautery on children should be gentle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care of the cautery site for three days, applying fresh bandages until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the site is sealed and the pain disappears.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care that the patient's food should be limited according to the duration of their healing, so as not to strain their stomach, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is desired to remove it after approximately ten days, administer the treatment properly and maintain that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should also be reduced through work and the intake of food and drink, and avoiding loud voices, because this entire regimen of healing will restore health.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, which begins at once and should not stop: cauterize the rupture with a red hot iron according to the amount of fluid that is emerging from it, just as if it were the third part of the intestine; then care for it as we have said, without allowing it to protrude.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some say that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, because it is noticeable and tries to protrude.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a pause line that holds the skin over the opening, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain ends in various members due to injury or impact and persists for a long time without yielding to medical treatment, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the appropriate size and shape for each member, taking into account its strength, flexibility, location, and the nature of the pain it suffers.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the first cautery is successful, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For usually, those pains are caused by the infection spreading to a member adjacent to that member, so you must be able to apply cauteries to them until the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprosy is sometimes treated with cautery due to a severe inflammation and melancholic disposition; specifically the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you wish to cauterize this, consider whether the leprosy is acute and if it responds to treatment as described in the previous sections without causing further harm, fear that the corruption has spread throughout the body and affects its entire structure; then cauterize it on the head using a hot iron: first at the middle of the forehead, then behind, touching the nape of the neck or at the back.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Lastly, with your hand, apply the cautery slightly before it touches the bone to avoid any sudden shock and displacement of the bones, thereby allowing the release of any accumulated vapors; and cauterize on the surface as required.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize those with those cauterizes that we have mentioned in the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizes on each cheekbone, and two cauterizes on both spinal bones of the neck, and five cauterizes on the spine, and one on the hip bones, and one on the shoulder blade, and two on each ankle, and one on each ankle bone, and two on each toe, and one on each toe. Cauterize all these joints of the upper and lower limbs and on every heel of their feet and on the sole.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that are on the sole, do not disturb those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its effectiveness and the better it is; and you should know that illness has no pain in cautery, just as it does in other parts, because the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And understand that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned about the kinds of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cautery with flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stuck or asleep and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it does not heal, then you cauterize that stuck member with cautery according to the size of the member or the severity of its condition.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the hot cautery enter slightly into the depth of the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes, cautery is also applied to numb certain areas, especially the hands and feet, the spine, and around the eyes where the nerves are visible, and this relieves the pain.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	One must not attempt this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body's members and the exit of the nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .xlix. (This appears to be a section or chapter heading, indicating the topic to follow.)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are ulcerated.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the wound is old and does not heal with any of the medical treatments, then you apply a cautery to it using a pre-heated iron according to the quantity of the specific type of cord until the white and color of the wound are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a mixture of flour made from herbs and lentils, infused with rose oil and arnica leaves, and add the dung of a pigeon or dove, each ingredient being in equal parts, and apply it to the wound as a poultice until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It appears that the text you provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. "Capitol .l." could refer to various concepts depending on the surrounding content. Without additional details, I cannot offer a meaningful interpretation.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	**De Cauterization (of Cramps)**
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and you feel that pain, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along the course of its growth as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the learned ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the growth; but to me, it doesn't seem like it should be done this way, as I fear it might ulcerate, and I have already seen this happen a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is therefore more carefully done that it be cauterized along the course of its growth with a circular cautery as we have said, or with numerous cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess takes a long time to mature, it may be due to excess pus or the patient's poor health condition, as it is old and frail with little strength, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturity of the abscess; then cauterize along its course using numerous small punctate cauterizations; and close it up afterwards, as it will slow down in maturing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make the perforation with a cautery, then take the shape of the cautery whose form is as follows: and place it in the middle part of the prepared area until the wire penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place is too far away, so as to relieve the body of the arm; and then take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you encounter that corrosion in a place which is to be treated with fire, then ignite cautery needles thin and thick, according to what is appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply the cautery from all sides until you eradicate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then apply heat to it for three days, placing your hand on the cauterized areas, repeatedly applying a mixture of oil every third day until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then care for it with a poultice of fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	It may be three days before the meat grows healthy and free from corruption, which is good; if not, repeat the cauterization on what is broken in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corruption is treated with some sharp medicine, for it takes the place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire is more suitable for older patients.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already spoken of the treatment for him using sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will use to treat him accordingly.
Capitol .liii.	It appears that the text you've provided is a part of a medieval medical treatise, and the sentence "Capitol .liii." likely indicates the beginning of Chapter 33 (liii stands for thirty-three in Roman numerals). Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation of this specific sentence. However, given the nature of the document, we can infer that it might introduce a new topic or continue discussing a previous medical condition.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	You should pay particular attention to the parts of the foot affected by a malady known as a 'clau' (toe joint), especially when it is swollen and painful; and in such cases, cauterization is performed in two ways: either with fire or with water-drawn cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The fire cautery involves igniting the cautery tool, which is shaped like a bird's claw, made of iron according to the size of the affected toe joint, and having subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply the hot instrument to the joint, and turn your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of wild mallows dried in salt to that area, and leave the plaster on for one night so that it is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a poultice of generated animal fat until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not curable and repeated incidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must manage those cauterizations with water, and take a narrow pipe of iron or bronze or a pen, and apply that to the joint; then pour a small amount of hot water into the pipe, hold your hand, and turn it around compressing it thoroughly, and constantly rotate the edge of the pipe along the root of the joint, until the hot water is consumed at the base of the joint. Wait for the patient to bear the bite of the hot water for about an hour, then remove it, because the joint will be freed from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they do as those before them have done, approaching the other towards all parts of their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then take care of those pus that the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with these ointments that the flesh is nourished by.
Capitol .liiii.	Capital .iii. (or possibly .liiii, though the numbering system is unclear)
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization (or burning) of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter a tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from some irritating cause, or any similar condition, you must cauterize it with four cautery points or two on each side of the spine, between each vertebra with one cautery; also cauterize on the patient's foot and over their stomach with olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of him rests and hastens the health of the afflicted disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of accidental burns on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When burns on the body appear, and there are pustules that result from corrupt gross matter, then at the beginning of their appearance, cauterize them over every part of the fistula with a delicate cautery or a piece of birch wood, whose tip is heated by fire; or shave off with a long razor; or apply a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases, cauterization is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not incurable and dislodge the excess, causing healing from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, be aware that this should be done with care through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	**Capitol VI.**  (Note: Assuming this is referring to a chapter or section title)
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flux of blood from an accidental wound through incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	In cases where arteries flow from a wound that has been deeply incised, or from the onset of abscesses or cauterization on a limb, it appears and is difficult to contain.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you must use your hand over the wound of the artery, and place it tightly until the flow of blood stops, making sure that no further bleeding occurs.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply the olive cautery to the fire, in both small and large numbers, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of these, small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is broken, quickly applying pressure to stop the bleeding, and cauterize it until the blood flow is restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you apply pressure and remove the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the clot is reduced.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to irritate the nerves here, which could cause further harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the clot, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either using a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction, where the ends of it are burned and the clot restricted, or tying it tightly with thread or ligature, or applying medicines whose virtue is to restrict the clot; and they should be tightened gently at the costochondral joints.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who properly administers restriction and tightens with bandages or by draping or due to burning causes and similar things, does not cease until the clot is thoroughly extracted.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If, in this case, it is not a suitable time for anyone else to intervene and there is no doctor present nor any medicine available, then open the indicated point gently on the site of the vein as we have said, and understand that the great constriction of it occurs when the blood clot is from the original source of the disease, and do not attempt to remove the clot immediately; instead, pour a large amount of very cold water over it until the clot freezes and thickens; then decide if cautery or medicine is required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second step.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, blisters, phlebotomies, wounds, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cauterization is appropriate and medicinal burning useful, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for such forms of cauterization; I have arranged the chapters here from head to foot.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter in this manner, so that relief is provided to him who seeks it, as he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, know that in this chapter it is for the purpose of fear, as it is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you must be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, you will often see cat's evacuation, which is most dangerous to life; you must pay attention to the vein or incision upon the abscess or observation of discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or beginning of a fever and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And among all these, there is fear and trembling; and in most of their cases, death follows.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And you must warn yourself that it does not fall upon you in which there is resistance, for sometimes you may find yourself in the hands of wicked men rather than skilled healers.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them, some will be carried away by their illness and its sudden nature must be alleviated, otherwise it will lead to death, due to the intensity of their illness, and the duration of their suffering, for the disease itself is a cause of death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who have granted you the gift of speech and said, "I hope for your health," their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not consent to anyone who approaches you with this mannerism; let your caution be greater than your knowledge, and your greediness; do not presume any cause regarding it, except through certain scientific knowledge that verifies it is right for you, to which you have been rightly led.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And in the treatment of all your illnesses, use prophecy and indication of the means that bring health, for it is in these that you find help in gaining fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and grant you guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you regarding what you need to know about it and what is required.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness manifests itself in children, and when the dark blood enters the head of the child, it affects its life.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes, for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	You may not see this disease in children; and to all those whom I have seen suffer from it, I have witnessed the effectiveness of this treatment on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that in a child whose head was filled with water, the head was always thus magnified so that he could not lay it down on his pillow because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the spine and bone or added beneath the bones on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that case if the moisture is between the spine and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a fissure at right angles, and the length of this fissure should be enough for the moisture to escape, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess becomes larger, here are two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture enters the bone, it signals that you should open the commissures of the head completely and press hard on the area, squeezing out the water; this is not something to be delayed.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make sure that you cut at the middle of the head in three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract the incision completely to remove all moisture; and tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters; and within three days, drill holes from above into the affected area and pour wine and oil; and clean the wound with ointment and cure the infection with heat, and hold the head in equal position; and feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another incision technique that considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it appears in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay close attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and do it as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and morbid matter through that flow of blood in the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries that are close to auricles, called "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an occurrence of sudden or severe pain in the hands or feet, and it is an old condition that does not respond to medical treatments, then the final remedy is to incise those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus you cover when you want to incise those that the disease has raised its head, and then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and then tighten the collar of the patient with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places that are appropriately compressed, and they remain concealed in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then carefully cut through the tendon with a scalpel, making an incision that enters between the bones and is appropriate for the thickness of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it at the incisions on its sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be such that when any vein is incised, the blood is prevented from escaping through its pulsating exit, which would occur frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you get from the wound is a quantity of one wine unce, and it cannot be more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the severity of the injury and the depth of the arrow in the body.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the infection, and if there remains any cause of the fracture on the bone, then cut it off so that it does not spread gangrene.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the infection with poultices and bandages from linen cloth, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	**Chapter III**
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migraines occur due to atmospheric humidity and the quality of the tears in the temples, or sudden weakness resembling these, and are not relieved by medical treatments as usual, we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of performing the operation and extracting those is to address the disease that originates in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple where it is indicated by your pulse, and it is hidden from most people due to its urgency and friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the collar of the disease with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears visibly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge that has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the cord as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and you remove it from inside and extract that from the superior parts while removing that from the cord and uncovering that of the tunics which remains beneath, from every part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then you wrap it at the end of the finger, and then cut a single part according to the amount by which the ends are elongated and contracted, and it will not bleed much, because if they are not incised, the blood from everywhere cannot be stopped.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then empty the vessel of blood within three beats.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arrow is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords of length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur before the healing of the wound, and bleed much.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this at that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, use a cautery within the bone, using a cutting cautery where the extremities of it have been incised, and hold in place that work done at that point.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or there is a chill present; for cautery is one of those remedies that aid in dispelling humors, and thus it is better applied while young.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the edges that have exposed the area of old scars, and place them neatly over it, and apply a cure with dry medicines that cause healing of the flesh and heat within so that it may be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time bleeding from the wound occurs, then immediately restrict that bleeding, either with cautery or by filling the area of the scar, and tighten your hand over it until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those symptoms is not present, then apply your thumb to the area until the swelling subsides, and immerse the location in water with a strong coldness until the sharpness returns, and tighten according as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more often extracted from the arrow wound is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, after you have felt both locations by trying, and then light some kind of fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it can be elongated, as it is not consolidated from all this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both blades is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better to have two blades with greater sharpness, as if both are very sharp and close to each other, they do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is slightly separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best of all works and most light.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two bones is determined by the quantity of thickness of that.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of sudden and acidic eye pain.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acute and acidic eye pains, it is the veins of those areas just beneath the skin of the head that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition is recognized. Often, the patient's face becomes discolored and they experience a sensation in their forehead as if ants were walking on it, and their eyes are exhausted, so wet that their eyelashes become uncomfortably sticky, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears. The traditional remedies used for this condition are futile.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which is on their forehead, and then inscribe three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two parts: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the tear duct, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful with the incision of the arteries which are in two openings, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three parts, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand, moisten it with the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife between the two acute extremities, which is the form of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the thigh bone, and then make a midline incision during the second procedure.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then take hold of this knife and insert it into the first incision, another time using another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge of this instrument against the flesh attached to the bone, and insert it between the bones, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appear of the cord, and then make it in the middle crack between the other cracks.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the sanction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each crack a small piece of cloth soaked in wine and oil, and it is important that it does not become infected with caution.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then apply to it ointment made with basilicum and rose oil, and other herbs as the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	The title seems to be incomplete or missing some context from the original text. It appears to be referring to "Capitol" but without additional information, it's challenging to provide a precise translation or interpretation. If this is part of a larger medical treatise, it could refer to a specific chapter or section heading.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding through catharsis and the descent of fluids from openings in the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute bleeding continues and the patient's wounds from the head injuries are severe, and the care of them has already been weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated along with their hair, and in the region of the head, there is intense pain and subsequent discharge, then be aware that these accidents do not come from nothing but veins opened from inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to rake their forehead, and then make a cut at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin with the cut from the left temple towards the right temple; and it should be a cut within the bone; and then extend your hand away from the cuts on the temples, which are better avoided after chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the discharge with a sponge or clean cloth, and then repack between the two edges of the cut with cotton wool or other suitable material.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply to them a dust of herbs mixed with wine and oil, so that they do not catch an infection quickly.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the infection has already decreased, then you will notice that the pain begins in the bone within it, and then treat it with a drying remedy that makes the flesh fall off, just as if you were to take two parts of flour and four parts of colza and mix them together, making a paste that is applied to these wounds, originating from the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what cats in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that cats in the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral or causes similar to a stone, such as iron and lead, or it is from a plant like barley or fava beans, or it is a fluid-related cause like water and wine mixed together, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a cat's bite occurs in the ear or any other cause resembling those that do not adhere or swell in the ear, hold the ear to the sun, and if the pain persists, it will distill into some cause of oil or cinnamon, then administer the extraction of it, and make the stinging condition appropriate, and position the nose away from the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then apply some pieces of cloth or wool to the ear canal, and pull the ear away from its attachment, as these motes (or specks) are often forgotten due to such causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called a delicate epichirurgical gear, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the gear, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction of it using an incredibly thin tool with minimal folding.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a tube of arax and insert the end of the tube into the canal of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the tongue with strong traction, as it is often seen with these conditions.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a warm light or some hot apparatus with which the outer shell of the object is gently heated, and apply that to the end of the ray, then wrap it decently around that part.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and carefully remove the ear from any moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then cut off that which causes the abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incision is that you begin by cauterizing the malady in the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of it, then make the incision between your fingers, and turn the edge towards the parts from which it came, and make a small fissure at the base of the edge where the grayish part of it is pressed against the area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure reaches the pearl (testicle), and when the testicle is affected, you should stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly make an incision at that time and treat it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the inflamed and swollen fats, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not follow your instruction, then take some fine spit as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think the part is already moistened by the aura's vapor, place it on heavy weights, and try to extract it gently or with precise incisions as we have said, for this eases its removal.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	If water has entered the ear, which is the cause of the disease at its onset, fill the ear with some very fine old wheat or lion's hair according to the length of the affected side, warm them slightly over the fire, and then the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump on it with all his strength, striking another stone against the one inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, continue with the stone until all the water is removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water is removed in this way, take some paper or wool and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until all the moisture inside the ear is dried out.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then insert other needles and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is drained out, and stretch that small tube from the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	If a stone is small, the extraction can be performed in the same way as we have described; however, if it is a large one that causes an apparent blockage, then the extraction should be done with gestures and incisions, and the cause of it should be treated more lightly than all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat that as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distills, and do not agree with your treatment, then you should observe the ear facing the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of the worms appears, then extract them with subtle gestures or incisions; however, if no cause appears, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, whose shape is as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And then insert the fine end of the instrument into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient; then suck with a strong suction, making movements as you do this, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not adhere to the above instructions, then seal and close the end of the cannula with wax as we have said; administer distilled liquids that have already been prepared in the treatment of worm infections, which you will find described in the section on distillation treatments.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your flow be the one that empties the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which is shaped as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or iron, keeping it straight, with a small opening on top and a flat surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is used, as it fits into the cavity of the containing cannula here; this will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the thread and neatly wrap it around the end, then pour oil into the concave part of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any remedy you prefer, onto the thread, and insert it into the ear while pressing your hand over it until the oil is expelled into the concave part of the ear and the patient feels relief.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should be scarified with a small piece of fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too severe, as ear remedies do not tolerate too much force.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure for Ear Inflammation.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some times children have abdominal pain without any perforation, and this happens in some men due to inflammation of the auricle's meat from an infection or from nothing; and this inflammation sometimes occurs on the edge of the wound of the auricle, which is not felt, and sometimes it is outside the folds.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the edge of it, which is not felt, is in the most difficult situations for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can feel it, make sure you turn the patient's auricle towards the light and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see any swelling, open it with a thin knife from which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the tightness is, from which one part is sharp and the other not; and the knife has two edges wide enough so as not to cut into the auricle.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus, if the operation is for a bone grown in the ear or in the flesh, then use delicate scissors and cut with velocity until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the operation is on the edge of the ear, then take a fine blade and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus, if you have sensed that the patient finds relief from this condition due to its ease of removal, then apply pressure to alleviate it; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then, place a bandage on the ear according to the amount of space occupied by the treatment you have applied with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the wound; or, if it is more beneficial, immerse it in water and sprinkle over it every third day, using it; and if the ear has already formed a crust, be careful not to ruin the treatment and replace it with another made from wax that is smooth, so long as the infection does not worsen; and attend to it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a flux of blood occurs, then immerse the exposed or wounded area in warm water, place a bandage upon it, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is called in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	It appears that your text is missing some content or has an incomplete structure. The phrase "Capitol .viii." does not provide enough context for me to determine the intended meaning or translation. If you could supply more details or a complete sentence, I would be happy to assist further.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the treatment of inflammation affecting the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The inflammation affecting the eyelids of the eyes sometimes becomes moist, at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, if you have those sticky or crusty particles, remove them from the affected areas and place a bandage over the treated spots.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If severe pain flows from a venous source, then you cauterize them with fine antique cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to make incisions and carefully observe their return when there is no cause for their reappearance; and when cauterized with fire, those incisions are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that occurs on the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Visibly swollen folds on the eyelids due to some cause that resembles a significant accumulation of strength and hardness are therefore called 'grandeyssa'.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an excessive addition of moisture on the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them consists of considering, when the size is proceeding in it from where the eyelid appears and is reduced throughout; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So now turn your attention to that open fracture according to its extent, and then carefully extract it from all sides so as to evacuate it; and then suspend that one and cut and separate it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you cannot make the incision at the beginning of it without penetrating the eyelid with a few small incisions, then this will not be noticed for any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care of that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not encounter much trouble, for the healing of its wound restores and incarnates it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must attend to the surface beneath, lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as you deem necessary from the beginning, press on it from all sides, and if the eyelid itself is elongated for some reason, pay no attention to it.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the initial incision, rinse the wound with salted water; and treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of an acute condition on the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Acute inflammation is caused by the conditions of the eyelid tissues above, and it particularly affects children, aggravating their eyes and leading to their discharge; and they cannot see clearly due to the tears that gather in them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you must keep those actions over their faces for a long time, and over their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their eyes you leave the eyebrows moist, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the imminence of its arrival is apparent in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel acuteness within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in some ways of operation, the patient positions their head on the thigh, and then wraps them with cloth and makes them cool; they form a circle according to the amount that contains the seed from every part, and then place it over one another, pressing with your fingers throughout so that acuteness is added to the middle of the circle, and then close the middle of the other part with humidity incident on the fissure in accordance with its extent, but the fissure must not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place in the preon a cover that you puncture the entire cord until you reach acuteness, for in the most advantageous positions, acuteness is achieved through fissure according to the form of white grayness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those sheets which you have wrapped around the affected parts outside and twist them with your left and right hand until they are completely dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to tighten it in the fissure so that the spatula does not penetrate too deep and dislodge it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust the fissure a little more easily until the process begins; and then remove the sheets as we have said, and immerse them in water, add vinegar, and place them over the area, and apply these as powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then some sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moistness is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an infection occurs in the pustular area, then treat it with emplasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	**Chapter XI**
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	**On the Methods of Touching (the Wound)**
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When, in the eyes, there are growths of abnormal hair, which are old and cause pain to the eye, these lead to various maladies, such as constant tears, soft eyelids, and inflammation, until they cause the destruction of the eye, known as "tactinir del huel" (eye irritation), and it is treated in four ways: with a hot cautery; with acute medicine, as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization; through incision and suture; or with canes, as explained later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you should position the patient's head in a suitable manner; then, with your left hand, turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards you, and if it is turned, that indicates the problem; otherwise, insert an needle into the area where there is a lump beneath the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through the lump to the other side of the eyelid, close to the edge where the hairs are, and pull the thread gently from beneath the eyelid towards the lump.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then gently open the gap between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with a delicate brush; then extract the tear and place the eyelid by covering it with small cotton or cloth particles, and press down on the eyelid as if to shape a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary to consider that the shape should be adapted according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those who suffer from significant swelling require a greater incision in the eyelid to allow for proper drainage.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then open with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the lacrimal nerve ending at the smaller lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should also be as thick as the diameter of a king's finger.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then apply the onion to one of the two angles of the wound, clean it entirely, and fit the binding with two lips made of wool or fine thread, wipe away the discharge, and make adhere what is superfluous from the dregs on both eyebrows for certain causes entwined, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then change the binding of the stitches every three or four days, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the seal of the wound and the influx of fluid; but tighter stitches are better. Thus, I tell you the ancient practices of the taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, always seek help from a knowledgeable doctor about the illness, and it is a good sign, and not something to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method of treatment, which is as follows: place the thumb over the eyelid like a mirror, and then raise the eyelid with three fingers, lifting it up and down according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, having the fingers ready, and this is not similar to cutting, then take a needle with a thread and insert one in the middle of the figure, and another close to the larger lacrimal (tear duct), and the second closer to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust these threads equal to each other, and then with your other hand elevate it at the same level as the first, lifting all the eyelid as we have recomposed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If after your incision or your fissure, an abscess occurs, then treat that abscess with cera and apply heat to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, when the eyelid's hair is turned inward, then use what we have mentioned about incision; more stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To prepare canes (possibly referring to medicinal herbs or ingredients) is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have mentioned; then make two or three thin canes (or strips) whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid, and their width is adjusted to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each piece, where the strings (or fibers) are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Next, add each thin piece beneath what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and tightly wrap the canes of each cut with firm tension, leaving it for a few days, as the tightness by the tension will eventually kill the nerve and prevent any further movement, and it will fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and return care to the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method for making two canals according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the exact amount of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Regarding the elevation of painful hairs on the body using an agule when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and painful hairs in the body, the operation on them requires that you take a subtle needle and insert it into that specific delicate area, and then adjust the ends of it very carefully, not making any sudden movements.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then, immediately, insert another fine thread inside him briefly, and tighten the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then hold the patient's head in the small of their back, near the sun, so that your work is clear, for this is a delicate and precise operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the root of the closely woven hair, using skill, and push it in deeply until you extract that from its natural place on the eyelid.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out from its roots, and insert the instrument into the gap, taking care that there is only one or two or three hairs left.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then gently pull your hand to that space where the skin is detached from the eyelid or the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the detached skin is not pulled out and remains attached to the wound, you will pull the skin back to its original position along with the thread that was placed there.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then examine the wound for its appearance, when you remove the thread and stitches, clean any debris from the wound, and leave the scar open for two or three days, so that the skin attaches to its place and a new, healthy tissue grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, you will take a longer natural hair and lift it up to that space where it should be extended close to the skin, and then gently pull it up.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of an injury seen on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see an injury on the eyelid, it is characterized by contraction of the eyelid when it's drawn to one side or the other, due to poor healing from a wound, section, or cautery, and it's called 'leporina' (like a rabbit's eye). This type of injury can be either natural or accidental, caused by the healing process of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the eyelids, placing a piece of cloth between them as a drain, and then tie them together so they heal properly.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must not use treatment methods that dry out the eye, as if you do, it will only cause further inflammation and harm that never fully goes away.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use one of the causes that mollifies it as fenugreek, and embrocate it in water in which fennel seeds are steeped or diluted with vinegar, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse the affected area in it, and treat it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your healing is that you perforate with whatever tool is not solidified according to the form that you see at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of deviation that does not return the form of the place according to what you see before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of hernia that is done on the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation which is found on the eyelid, called truly 'alkalization'; it is either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental alkalization can be caused by infections, cuts, cauterization, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert one end into the flesh, then pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart from its attachments with the needle and cut with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the eyelid to its natural position if it is suitable; otherwise, take a thread and secure that in the slit, then turn the eyelid over and make both slits on the inner edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extreme points of the two slits at the two angles of the incision, which you have made where they meet, form an angle that, when they come together, creates a figure of their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letters: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then pull the flesh away from that area, to the extent that it exposes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and apply remedies consisting of soft medicines and hot compresses as needed to promote healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to increase the incision or suture or apply a cautery, then make sure that your incision is flat across the hairs of the eyelid as mentioned before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the water between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the complete discourse on the treatment of ulcers when they are raised or left open, allowing them to heal according to how the ulcer is prepared, it varies in form and type.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare various schemes to make it possible for him to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and treat that disease according to what suits him in terms of operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, it makes the eyelid firmly attached to the white part of the eye, preventing its easy movement and natural functions, so you must insert your finger between the eyelid and the iris, and raise or extend it away from the corner of the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then carefully incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, not sharp from the cuts, making it obtuse slightly so that the malady is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula when it does not damage the wound with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should remove that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can return to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply to the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in it sun-heated water dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the wound with lukewarm water, place over the wound wool infused in egg albumen, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of a lump and the prominence of tissue in the lacrimal area.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a lump can be of two types: either it is nervous, resembling a subtle hard chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen humidity, which when pricked with a needle, is easily detached and the needle does not get stuck in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both these conditions do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, gradually covering the eye, prohibits light and movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of working in the incision is that the patient holds their head in their hands, opens the eyes wide, raises the upper eyelid with one hand, and with the other, gently extracts the lump in two or three parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and, with a slight pressure, insert it into the lump, choosing a sharp object such as horsehair or goose feathers or strong wool, doubling the end of the needle gradually and placing it in the middle of the lump. Penetrate the lump with the needle and tie the lump to the thread, then extend it little by little and extract the entire mass from the eye, removing the lateral part of the lump that blocks the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you cut open that part of the skin at the anus of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then, with a thin spatula or small scissors, you incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct, removing the flesh of the natural tear duct so that, by making this incision, continuous tears do not flow.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times, the stone is in the bladder completely extended or embedded, as we have said, and with a thin, sharp spatula, it should be extracted in such a way that this is its form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, put a little salt or finely ground soot on it and leave it for another day; and then take care of it until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it embedded in that place, then look for other remedies for this type of nail, which is cured with medicines and healed thusly as you find and remove it from the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to open that, then open the space of the patient and take a small piece of gauze with sharp accuracy according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it turns out that that one is hardened and bent and stuck in that place, then distill from your time into the wound with a sharp tool of tin or iron or salt mixed, and wrap the wound within the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation on that one until everything that is foreign is removed, otherwise, a foul wound will form in the wound, for when you leave it, the infection will heal from the beginning as it is cured.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then you continue your operation on that part until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the tear duct carnation, if it is noticed with great pain, should be suspended immediately; and incise that one part from the other, without closing the incision so as not to block the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill the tear fluid from the main duct carefully until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of hernia and that which has arisen from attached flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases, in the eyes of certain individuals, there is a growth of sickly flesh, which presses upon or draws close to the pupil, or becomes enlarged and pulls the eyelids outward, forcing them to adhere to the bones around the eye and resembling a small shield.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The surgical procedure is such that the patient holds their head in place on the table; then open the incisions on that part and collect all the tissue with scissors as appropriate, and to this add a forceps or basket; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful of the wound so you do not spoil your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be such that you incise those or scrape off the tissue that we have removed in the incision of the nail, or use small scissors carefully according to the shape that comes next in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that tissue is removed, then fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle on it a powder made from herbs similar to those of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a clean cloth or linen until it is assuredly free from infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you see any cause for further difficulty or severe pain, and fear an infection, then leave the wound and treat that infection with what is suitable for it, and repeat the operation on that until it is healed, and do something similar to the surrounding flesh which has suffered from this particular wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should be aware that any cure for a severe wound by natural or accidental means, such as cutting, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is able to withstand that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	**On the Collection of Sabers in Wounds**
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Saber (swords) often become entangled in wounds, which makes them difficult to remove and prevents the wound from healing, and it takes a long time for the wound to heal.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the wound in which the saber is stuck is strong and does not have any other severe damage besides the saber, then you should collect that saber.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to hold their breath and then suspend those veins with an occlusor or two, according to your discretion; and let that occluder have a subtle, double fold in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	They make incisions gradually on a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then they gently compress those veins with subtle force, abstaining from pressing too hard, until the blood stops flowing and those veins appear to be filled with humor and are turned red.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to touch the humor at the edges of the incision; if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, and you are firm in your operation, only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, pour distilled vinegar or wine over the humor to corrode what is filled with sap.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to collect all of that humor at once, then apply a plaster to it to alleviate the patient's pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and there is no risk of infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over them according to the manner of the disease until it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the way of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute medicine, as is preceded by the narration of the patient's condition and it is not cured, then do not apply any bandages to them, but rather make incisions over the affected area after the maturity of the inflammation, and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you should cut it with an instrument that has this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an acute cap, and it is made of iron, and the head is rounded so that it can be pierced with a point by the liming or alkali puncturing gently (thus as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted place of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	This should be done at times, and then the place is restored using drying and stopping agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh in it and the body is separated from the healthy and sound for 40 days, and it is not renewed or infected and no accident occurs to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if that is not the case, then it is not to reduce the fissure to its natural state but rather to mold it in the shape of the nose. This is done according to the bones, either by cutting them with a sharp tool or by using acute medicine. Once the bone is exposed, you take hold of it according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the stick of it be first extended within the extremity thus as often as necessary.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, and that is the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the hollow, and then rotate your hand on the groove until it penetrates all the bone, and you feel the pain as it passes through and comes out here when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you will restore the area with stipulant, drying medicines as it has been shown to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, the matter that exuded from the openings outside returns to the nose, thus this is less concerning about the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the hernia's protrusion.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia is prominent and does not yield to gentle pressure or decrease in size, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then continue with the following steps: make incisions in the neck of the hernia for better drainage; apply suction if beneficial; then apply a liniment made of aloe, fennel, henbane, and horse-tail, and finally secure a compress over the hernia using motes (small particles or powder).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the particles is to take sheets of lion's fur, each sheet cut into four pieces, and make them into a powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place these layers one on top of the other according to the quantity of hernia present.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tightly secure these with a strong cloth; repeat the suction from the incisions; and keep the hernia tight with the bandages during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If the ligament becomes softened during this time, then make sure it is very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then hold the ligament, both day and night, as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is well, otherwise, repeat the application of poultices, compression, and sucking cups until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI. (Note: The number is written in Roman numerals, indicating the chapter number.)
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the incision of the tunic's eminence (uvea).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When a disruption occurs in the tunic (uvea), and it is swollen and you need to operate, first remove the eyelids with a gentle pull, shaping them as naturally as possible, and if you want to make an incision, perform the operation as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uvea, starting from below, and then pass another needle through it, doubling the thread from the lacrimal side; thus penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position. Then incise the place where the double thread is, and lift the part of the uvea attached to the needle in a circular motion, and tighten that part strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in hot oil, and wait until the thread falls off on its own.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then apply the humid wool to it, to comfort him until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, from all over, the wool collects in a circle around the most prominent part, and then it is perforated with a fine spatula that reaches to the bottom of the wool, allowing the albumin humidity to escape, and the wool descends and enters.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII.**
De curacio de alconati.	**On the Healing of Alconati.**
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alcemies is nothing but a healthy condition that resembles a flowing water and it is not the latter.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of operation in this case is to stop the illness from spreading to the affected part and right away, take hold of the patient's head with both hands from two different sides, and try to prevent the healthy fluid from flowing into the parts below; and thus it remains, without descending, and the light (or life) is preserved, and the illness understands its causes in this way as it observes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent of the healthy fluid is not prepared as we have said, then stop the illness from spreading between your fingers and take a fine needle, pierce it into that part covering the panniculus beneath the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (at the desired location), until the healthy fluid is drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is drained, you will distill the warm water mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for other causes as well, as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water retention in the legs.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have discussed the types of water retention and which ones require puncturing, as appropriate, according to their condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You should now understand how to stop the patient's pain between their thighs on a couch and bind their feet tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand near the patient's eyelid, if the lid with water is the left one, use your left hand; or if it is the right one, use your right hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand if the pain is on the left side; or use your left hand if the pain is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then hold the end of the thumb near the edge of the eyelid for the thickness of the film on the inner side of the lower eyelid, and gently pull the thumb towards you while turning your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate the eyelid film, and feel that the thumb has already reached the inner part due to the pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And observe that the measurement of the path of the thumb to the point it reaches corresponds to the measurement of the space from the pupil to the edge of the black circle, which is the corona of the eyelid; for you will see the pupil clearly through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the cup inside the area where the water is, and draw it down towards you one time, then another, and so the water descends, and soon after, the illness over which it holds its gaze, will be drawn into the cup and within it.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you should pause again before removing the cup until it is completely drained.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is completely drained and does not descend, then carefully remove the cup, turning your hand a little at a time, and dissolve into the water a small amount of clear salt from a gem, and wash the inside of the wound; and then apply outside the wounded area, or stop it, or wrap it in rose-colored oil and white wool, and bind it with the water of the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But for us, and those of our time, it is better to treat these things with white wool and rose-colored oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not adhere to your knowledge in the use of the knife through its hardness - for it is one of the tools with which many men are unfamiliar -, then take up the sponge, which is called a blade, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce that joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and do not stop until you have made a subtle opening in your knowledge.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert your knowledge as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's peaceful sleep, done decently in which they sleep on their back at home in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pay attention to the nature of this, so that it may be peaceful in its nature, and do not disturb their head towards the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And arrange the ligature according to its position within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then, with a keen eye in that dark matter, examine and discern some causes, and return the ligature within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And be aware of what you do at the hour of treatment or, perhaps, soon after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You will notice that this is done for such reason that the water can be slightly heated and gently applied with care.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If there is a risk of infection after cauterization, be aware that you should open the wound and clean it with water on the seventh day, and correct any deviation in the bandage.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then, examine him closely and focus on the face where he is being treated, leaving it as it is for several days, existing in that dark matter.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually immerse yourself in that nature, gently discussing its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from seeing certain things, and now you must be daring with regard to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already come to know some of those who are in the art, and someone said that fire should be made in the magnesium air, through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you should not think that this is perfectly known in our land or is written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices of magnesium, so that it may be about those who ignore them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the acute end thus with that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	**Chapter XXIV**
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are diverse attached carnes (tissues) of which some cause is connected to a growth of flesh resembling a scorpion's tail or a polyps growing from the sides; this malady is called polyps because it resembles those feet represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, blue-black in color; and from this arises the flesh of a lion not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must perform the malady's removal between your fingers and place it in the sun, and dry the nose of it, and pick at the tiny particles in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and divide what you have understood from them with a delicate scalpel between the parts, knowing that all the flesh is still intact; if any cause arises from it for which laceration is possible, then quickly use one of the delicate instruments to facilitate this without any difficulty.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it is a mild or acute apoplexy, then apply it to what it covers; but if it is of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that part until the san is separated and all cavities are intact.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then carefully get near the nose, make an incision with the instrument, and use either salt water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is blocked and you feel moisture in the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside him there is flesh filled with pus between the bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should insert a thin instrument into him where there is any abnormality, and move it within him gently, and between each joint apply the amount of pressure as appropriate, and manipulate the patient's pain by inserting one end of the instrument into the nose either by cutting or for other possible causes.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this is done, it releases its smell within so that it reaches the nasal canals, and it should be held over the patient's face, for it is a common occurrence that several times children in school have been affected by this action, and it is a minor cause for those who want to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the instrument: one end protruding from the nose and the other entering the nose, and apply pressure to the flesh around the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh has attached itself to the instruments within the nostril.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the gallbladder, place it in a container with some salt water, and do this for three to five days until the solution corrodes all that is soft in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If the treatment ends and there is no improvement, use other remedies.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the design of an enema tool, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small cavity, and attach it in such a way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube as well, with a handle at the end of the enema tool, which should be flat and open; to this, attach the nozzle from which you will pour oil or water that you want into the body's humors.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these herbs are precious: prepare from castor root, white birch, ginger, safran piletre, long pepper, scorzonera, and epithymus of spices in wine; mix with beetroot juice and clay, and make pills; take one pill with lukewarm water, and apply to the affected parts.
Capitol .xxv.	It appears that you have provided a reference or a title, but no text for translation. To assist you effectively, I would need the actual content of the "Capitol .xxv." for translation. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to help.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow on the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Various veiled growths are found on the ends of the nose, which initially seem magnificent and swollen, but after some days, a mot is formed that attracts attention due to its appearance.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should pay attention at the onset of its appearance, and eliminate it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is located in that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the operation takes too long, and it is necessary to cut, consider if it is inflamed, hard, of dark color, and with little feeling; then do not touch that part with a sharp tool, for it is a sign of gangrene; in fact, such symptoms indicate great evil in the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of good appearance and not dark colored, and it is possible to operate on it anywhere, then evacuate the infection and cut it without fear, and treat the place with a drying and constricting agent until healing occurs.
Capitol .xxvi.	**Chapter XXVI.**
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and auricle when continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it seldom provides much aid to the operation except in certain cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause among these, and it appears to be a fresh wound or infection, you should then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and take care of the inner part so that it heals properly.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the rupture are already separated and each part is healthy, you should then extract each piece from its neighboring tissue carefully to ensure it does not become infected.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then, adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and triple-stressed herbs on those sutures, and place a thin piece of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing over it, leaving it for two or three days. Then remove that plaster and replace it with new one, and take care with ointment so that the wounds heal properly.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you add the solution for continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as it has been taught to you and done.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the removal of those causes that come in both lips in the partitions within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	You often notice in many people within the partitions of their lips various hard spots resembling tough flesh, some are larger and others smaller.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should remove the lips and partitions of each of those hard spots from all parts, and then fill the place with a clean bandage as soon as the bleeding stops, and also wash it with vinegar and treat the place with water that has been heated, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of tissue adhering to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Treat the adherent tissue around the gums that ancient practitioners called 'albus', then either suspend it or hold it with forceps and cut it away, allowing the healthy blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply pressure over the treated area with sage or other stoppers or astringents.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the tissue returns, cut it again secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Because of the tooth's root.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth within the jaws and between the gums, there are coarse cuts, scars, and some blackened areas, this indicates inflammation in the gums and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So therefore, you should remove the patient's pain between their thighs, stop the head of it in its place, and pull out the teeth where those cuts and similar marks appear, without causing any further damage, and this brings about the darkness, whiteness, and other conditions as they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this remains as it is in the beginning of the reason, well and good; otherwise, you should repeat the reason over those other parts each day, second, and third, until you come to the final statement in what you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various types of cutting tools and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the tools with which a tooth is extracted from within are different from the tools used to cut between teeth according to other shapes, and these forms of cutting tools must be prepared as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all possible care and take your time in its complete extraction, for there is no reason to delay the moment of its removal when it is extracted, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse lies in the extraction of itself.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain can sometimes deceive and lead one to believe it comes from a healthy tooth; therefore, extract that one, and the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through operations by barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful, and you know, you will cut into the gum around the tooth using a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth's root completely, and then slowly apply pressure with your fingers or use fine pliers at the beginning little by little until that pain ceases.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use a strong tool for good speech or a powerful forceps, and place the patient's head between your hands that hold them gently to prevent any harm, and carefully extract the tooth in a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it into the patient from all sides with ease and make an effort to remove it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or rotten, then know that you must wrap a piece of cloth around that wound and stretch it with the tip of a fine wire so that it does not tear in the hour of your tightening grip on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification carefully on the entire gum line and take care not to break or tear that fragile part, and return to the patient with caution for the evil that is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity regarding the removal of teeth, for they do not administer what we have recommended; often times, they cause great pain to men that is very difficult to bear, and the roots of the teeth are torn out completely, or some of them, or even entire bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed on many occasions.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then wash out the eradication of it with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a continuous flow of pus, and the swelling increases, trim some amount of it with a scalpel and rinse over the wound, and if that pus does not cease, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be fine and slender, with their distant end suitable for holding a tooth from the beginning, short in length and thick, so that they do not bend when used in such delicate operations.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be thus with wide ends, thick in the middle and narrow at their distant tips, so that when you first take hold of them, they are not bent.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron with straight ends, and at the tips of these forceps there are teeth that interlock with each other, entering by strong compression, and sometimes the tips of these forceps have the form of a bird's beak, which is curved and very firm.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is lodged for some reason, first place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the location is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a crowbar called a ciconia or guanta.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be filed away inside with a chisel or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, then you must dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called a small lever, whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but sharp knife, small in size, and do not cover it so that it can cut.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the incision for this is forgotten, then do so; otherwise, help me with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is triangular with a thick end in which there is some depth.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is triangular with an even thinner end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now assist with this instrument, having two inclines; the appropriate shape is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments which are used for dental extraction; since it is skillfully done with this instrument resembling a large claw, and the shape is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may be of any thickness, but not covered so as not to be squeezed.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools with moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans, through their knowledge of the art, understand the meaning of various operations and ailments, for they are experts in dealing with diverse afflictions; these are the ailments to which the ancients did not give name or pause, due to their varied forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or any other bone in the mouth is squeezed, then place the weight carefully on that area as is appropriate for that part of the body, using the tools and forceps we mentioned for removing teeth, and assist with the handling which this shape requires.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And within it, any swelling should be reduced little by little, and it should be tightly bound or held in the mouth so that nothing evades or escapes until the bone of all parts is completely healed; and then restore the area with suitable medicine for it.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, quickly remove that of that fracture and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter .XXXII.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	**On the Care of Teeth Among Others.**
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent in violation of their natural form, especially among women, and most particularly in the case of very young girls; then consider this: if it is not possible to replace or extract that tooth, but you wish to separate it from another tooth, then cut it off with a suitable instrument having a sharp, pointed end, similar to the tooth of a pig.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision, which you will incise on it in too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it be not cut away from any of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is eminently exposed to decay, then sharpen that with a sharp iron lime from India whose form is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of the iron from India, the margin precisely; and it should have very small points as with a lime, which are used to make needles, and through this the tooth is slowly sharpened in many days with ease, so that no other teeth are cut away or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then bind those at the end, and shave those with other razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth from which one piece is broken and affects the tongue, then cover that you sharpen the space between which the roughness of that fraction is blocked and entangled, and apply pressure so that the tongue does not hurt nor does the speech corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by concussion and removal due to impact or extraction, and the patient cannot chew effectively, having tried strict dieting with medicinal astringents without success, then consider using gold wire instead of silver for binding, as silver corrodes and becomes useless after some time, but gold remains unchanged forever.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness as to fit between the teeth, and the method of binding is that you take the wire and wrap it around two healthy teeth twice, and then twist it into a spiral between two damaged teeth, or around one or both remaining parts of a broken tooth, ensuring the wire reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the tissue repair within the opening from which you began, and tighten your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the tightening of your hand, which you tighten around the thread, must be such that it does not tear the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut the ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and insert them at appropriate places and gestures, and convert them into the spaces between the healthy teeth and the damaged ones, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then bind it tightly with a bandage as narrow as a Roman strip.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, tighten it or those with another thread in such a way that it does not come undone at any time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thus when you perform these ligatures:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two returns to its proper place in their locations, and they grow back as we have recommended, and remain intact.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled craftsmen and wise men do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is appropriate to use a cause from the bones of a cow, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and held as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Regarding the incision of the ligament seen on the tongue, it prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which is seen on the tongue, sometimes prevents speech or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs due to a plague that has already become solidified.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the malformation, removing its existence in the throat; and lift up their tongue, and then incise that nerve ligament according to its width so that the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you apply oil and cut it according to its width so that you incise the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a fissure in the flesh and cut here behind, allowing pus to flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then clean the wound with warm water or vinegar or friction water; and take away the tongue; it is necessary that the patient keep their tongue in some position each night to prevent another relapse.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flux of blood occurs, apply a hot compress to the place; if the pain is from wind, cauterize the place with a poisonous cautery suitable for it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that treatment for the other causes until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv. (Note: "xxxv" likely represents the Roman numeral for 35)
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On extraction of the ranula, keep the tongue away.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue becomes infected and resembles a small wound, preventing it from moving naturally; and its strong inflammation increases until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, feeling it before the light, and considering the aperture.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If it appears of a dark, hard color, where the hernia has no sensation, then do not touch that part which is cracking.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns to white, in which there is humidity, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, and divide it completely; and if you have strong wind during the time of your operation, then hold from above with three gestures, using vinegar, as long as it restricts the wind.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have tried it completely, as much as it has been washed with wine and salt; and take care of the other treatment for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of abscesses from two ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When swelling occurs in the throat, there are glands that are gathered together and swollen, which protrude outside and are called "two ears," and when you treat them with what has been said in the previous section and they do not heal, consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a reddish color and the root is thick, do not touch it with a knife due to the flow of pus; instead, leave it as it matures, and either it will be drained on its own or it will break open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that one needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in front of your operation, if the abscess has rested sufficiently through rest or if it has decreased at all; and then stop the malady in front of the sun, and let the head of it be in the low position, open its mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of it gently with a delicate instrument of which this is the shape.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and be subtle with a sharp blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on the tongue and show the abscess to your patient, observe the place where it hurts deeply, then take an onion and place it on the affected area, and pull it out towards the sides as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunic, and then cut into it with an instrument of which this is the shape.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, however, its extremities are curved, so the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron then covered with cloth.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at hand, then cut with a spatula of which this is the form: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one slit, cut the other according to this same manner of incision, and then close the incision with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, wash with decoction of mugwort or juniper leaves and similar to that of the strict causes while the flow of blood is restrained, and then take care so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, you may see other appendices or those two auricles, and incise them as you have seen and mentioned in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	You have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she was on the brink of death if more time had passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already torn so much that it had created two openings through which pus could escape.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So, you should listen to me carefully and follow these steps: incise them surgically and remove the abscess; drain a large portion of it, then identify the site from which you understand the other wound is originating; press the mouth of the patient and grasp their tongue, then place the abscess in that opening.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut out a large part of it, and there would be little or no bleeding from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, the treatment for that woman is absolutely necessary, and she should begin to drink water immediately, and then consume food. Therefore, you should not hesitate to make incisions in those motas (swollen areas) for a long time, but rather succeed with one incision after another in the same location, which will help prolong the healing process.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should use herbs and cauterize the ulcer of the patient, thus adding to it; and then walk around and do not wash what God has given you from that wound.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incision of the huvela (a term likely referring to a specific body part, perhaps a growth or lump) when it becomes apopthetic.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the larynx, and it is elevated and lengthy, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When treatment is as we have said in the previous section, and you do not agree with the treatment, and indeed, it has been observed that when the inflammation is already present and subtle, one must incise the rounded addition; and if it is of considerable length, and it is bleeding, either a dark or black color, and does not yield to touch, then be aware that you must fear the incision, for there is great danger in this.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the manner I have said regarding its whiteness and length, you must then remove the malady, and with an instrument that shapes it, press on the tongue, and close the gap with a new one, and pull it down and incise it with either of two instruments called in the incision of two lines.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be careful not to incise anything other than what is appropriate according to the natural term of its addition, for if you incise more of it, you will harm its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was afraid of the incision, use cunning in the cauterization of it to dispel their fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is nothing but sharp stone, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the table, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremities of it be concave in which the medicine is placed, just like a spoon's concave part, and place the instrument with the medicine on the skin, and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one does not escape from that proper cause to the throat of them, and binds that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And now apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the throat by making a space with the point of your tongue until you feel it become weakened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the finger, submerge the wrap in the medicine, insert the finger into the wrap through a small opening until the wrap sticks to the finger, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, then using a cautery soaked in the medicine, wipe along the circuit of the ulcer, cleanse that area with water and soap, and bandage it up, using guards as needed until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is much safer than incision and is free from much fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some times the uvula is cured by something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is healed by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scabs of Arabic camomile, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and immerse them in wine; let the mixture bubble and boil; place a trough in the middle of the mixture, upon which rests an instrument shaped like a hook made of silver or bronze according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the tip into the patient's mouth over the uvula, until the vapor obscures the uvula completely.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then repeat this process on any remaining moist spots, but be careful not to perform this treatment immediately after meals, as it could lead to the development of abscesses; do not press too hard on the abscess, or you risk complications. You should only attempt such a procedure if there is clear evidence of an abscess, and in that case, you must first consult with a physician.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and make a loop at the end of it with wire, so that the mouth of the hernia is closed, for the wire's loop prevents the gas from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the removal of thorns and other objects stuck in the skin, and from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	You may observe objects stuck in the skin, such as thorns or pins, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract what is visible among these, examining it closely, for you press the tongue against the tool in front of the light, so that you may clearly see what is in your mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, for the strong cause attached to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or make the patient swallow a piece of napkin or shredded lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry seaweed lion's beard, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are spines and is extracted, it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can take an eel and tie it with thread, lay it on the table, and carefully extract it; or take a pig's intestines and carefully open them and extract them.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thick but sharp, and at the end of it make a concave shape that you insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And he raises his head up, and be careful of the touch of his throat bone, so that he can identify what causes him pain, whether it is a bone or a spine, or what the doctor puts his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient's illness is more severe, with greater knowledge of the location of the cause attached and penetrating below, he applies his hand to the instrument to it according to the amount prepared for him, until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix. (Note: "xxxix" is likely a typo, as it should be "XXXIX" for the correct chapter number)
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating blood clots as described above, using medicines rather than surgical removal, consider the patient's throat under the sun, since you will have touched their tongue with the instrument we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the pulse, extract that small or subtle sensation appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract that, take a concave needle and insert it into the hollow of the hernia, then place a heated iron in the concavity of the needle and do this several times (as long as the pulse is halted and the hernia is separated from the hollow) and then bandage the hernia with water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a cloth filled with water, apply it to the opening of the hernia, and wash the area; do not suck on it or drink any water from it, as the pulse will soon feel the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the hernia with herbs or spices using the instruments we have mentioned for the suffocation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls down.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another method of operation through suffocation of that part: you take a cloth in which are ignited coals and the cloth is covered with a covering in the middle of which there is an opening, and on that opening is placed the end of the instrument; then apply it from above the suffocation; and the patient places his mouth over the end of the tube, and closes his mouth so that the suffocation is not expelled until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, because the blood flow will fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you do not eat, then repeat the suffocation with motion several times, keep the patient from drinking, and eating salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that at this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as well, except that it has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a crocodile's beak, which is smooth from lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse regarding the prevention and treatment of wounds.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The wounds are special spots, of various kinds, according to the recollection of their origin, each described in detail in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in puncturing and cutting them in two ways: one is for the specific type of wounds themselves; and another for understanding the moisture associated with them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is for places where bodily accidents occur, where a wound in the head is different from a wound in the foot; and a wound in fleshy parts is different from a joint wound; and each of these has its specific surgical treatment.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some apoplexies cover those that do not pierce but are rather a maturation of the health in those or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other apoplexies that cover those that are to be pierced when they cross, and are not matured according to their course, also include apoplexies that affect the joints, where an apoplexy occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged as long as you can do something about it, which is why it causes contraction of that member; or if it's close to a major member, and if you delay piercing it while it's matured, it will affect the primary member; or it's near the buttocks, so pierce one that hasn't matured, not one that's dry, otherwise the pressure of the air will prevent the preen from escaping and cause it to be elongated within the parts of the anus, forming a fistula, or something done in the term of the apoplexy that isn't healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it's important to know the time for piercing the apoplexy, and that's when it's matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that it is cured when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in the heat and pulse, and the redness of the affected area improves, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And furthermore, know how to recognize the incision needed in the pus-filled area beneath the abscess and from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The incision should always be made through the skin or flesh, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, lastly, in all other areas that do not reflect light; for in those that do reflect, one must use the incision according to that particular member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But if the abscess is in a fleshy area, then it is better to delay the incision until the digestion of the pus is confirmed as described earlier; for if you make the incision too soon before that, the body's defense against the infection will be weakened and the abscess walls will be stiffened, increasing its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Some wounds may be made completely through the flesh or body parts as needed, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large wounds make a deep and wide incision or create sections according to the diversity of the size of the wounds.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other types of wounds where the cavity is concave and must be incised, when made in such a way that the pain and swelling are already present, it is as if it has happened in cases of double or bubonic plague.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in sections with three angles; and of those where it is incised like a figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the wounds of the knees.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of their kind where a round section and a lunar section is administered, resembling those mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If that one whom no such things befall, when you make incisions into the skin's surface, take care to pierce only at a shallow depth or else it may become infected.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not pierce it and try to extract all the poison at once; instead, after extracting some, compress the abscess and repeat the process over several days, gradually increasing the size of the openings according to their healing.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is very weak, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person, because the animal spirit moves more readily at the exit of the pus, and they often die from the disease, and you must operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter: when you make incisions to drain these abscesses, be careful to avoid infection, and consider whether the abscess is small or a flat cut; then administer lukewarm water or some other anti-fever medicine. If the abscess is large and the cuts from the incision are deep, you must apply pressure in each wound until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the tendon or a concavity in the contour is excised, then cover it with a piece of thick cloth or thread from linen, as when you treat cuts or shaves; moisten it daily for three days and then apply a poultice and cure the wound until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If bleeding occurs during your operation, administer warm water mixed with vinegar and apply a cloth of linen over the site of bleeding, and press it until the flow stops several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you must administer regimens and remedies, and apply powders recommended at various points of this book and according to division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is winter, and the site of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must apply poultices in hot oil and vinegar, and place them over the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then you should apply powdered ointments mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and you must open up the abscess and cleanse it and administer what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but more according to the way of distinction that I have already said about each type of abscess, in what manner it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of abscesses that occur on the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the head, small abscesses occur, which are of various types with shells that are formed; and their species have different names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from their glands, and those contain a moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain a moisture similar to pus, and resemble it; and those that are stone-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the removal of those does not cause violent pain.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the extraction of those is that you expect those with instruments in the shape of which they enter, called entomes, as long as you know it contains them.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what contains is moisture, then you cut those as section according to their length by cutting the surface according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Thus, when moisture is evacuated, you scrape that part where the moisture was, and do not leave any cause for that, for troops seen returning indicate some cause from that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian (or warm) water, if present, or otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that remedy and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that is broken off from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then you repeat the application of that remedy in hot Egyptian water according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin condition; when the moisture has healed, cure the wound with that moisture.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with fatty knots, then you pierce them according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have a section without a clear shape, and you cut between the two lips of this section and remove it entirely, then use your virtue to extract the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your bow (or perhaps metaphorically, your ability) feels resistance, do what I have first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, do in the abscess of the section (or wound) as I have told you; and cut over the abscess that is filled with liquid, for it is less severe, containing little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Sometimes these abscesses are so hard in the head or on the bodies of certain men that they contain no liquid; which causes them to be incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman, and left with a hard, dry, white stone, which cannot be extracted, and if anyone strikes it, they will be infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other instances of accidental spots on the head, except for these mentioned in this chapter, such as the spots that appear on the heads of children and require trimming of the auricles, the treatment for all of these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their origin so that the matter of the illness is removed from the deeper parts to the shallower ones.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then take care of those as is appropriate for the treatment of that one.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofula that occurs on the collarbone.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Various incidents cause these spots on the collarbone, armpits, and angles, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And thus those that occur in the colon, and so motifs that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those proceeds from its own tunic, and thus as with the nodes and aphthae of the head, so have we treated.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are motifs; some are stone-like, others contain humidity, and some are malicious which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you perceive a good disposition by touch, whose color is specific to the color of the boil, and it's swollen throughout, not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or fascia, and not filled with pus, you should incise it along its dry, superficial surface from the part closest to the body to where it deviates from the skin, as we have said about the aphthae on the head, and remove it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the knife is not sharp enough to allow you to make precise incisions, or if it causes discomfort for the patient, and you make incisions where they are not needed; if you were to cut a vein or nerve, this would prevent your operation, leading to an infection from the vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, inflame the wound, and leave a scar as the ulcer heals and becomes softened.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until it is complete.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then carefully inspect the said indicated small ulcers; if any appear to be caused by a different condition, make incisions and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the region of a large scrofula vein, you must be careful not to puncture that scrofula from its region.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	First, carefully extract the twisted and broken thread, taking care not to pull it further into the wound.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with fresh, new bandages that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment, and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you puncture the entire scrofula, be careful to close both edges of the wound and soon, any excess pus will stop leaking.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you find that there is continuous discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to understand where it originates, puncture its region, drain it, and then apply stitches and the mentioned treatment.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those of scrofula that contain humidity, make a deep perforation at the place where it appears on your body, and stop the perforation from which pus flows in the lower parts of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the perforation, use suitable substances found and similar to these, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound has already been cleansed, then apply a treatment with a substance generated from flesh to promote healing.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilot (or membrane) of the abscess, make an incision during the acute phase of the illness.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to make this incision on the pilus (or hair) of the abscess, and we have not seen anyone in our land who does this.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of these ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men, there is a tendency to form stones, and it is important to avoid the extraction of the gallbladder, as by doing so, all the veins and the main ones related to the disease are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the gallbladder, be careful to avoid the section of the epiglottis to prevent the loss caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the epiglottis with three incisions from the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section through the latitude in the one between two circles for quantity, and make the incision in the cartilage, not in the muscle, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the organ are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the laryngoscope slowly, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid damaging the vessels with force, especially for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then make incisions in the patient as we have recommended; it is meant regarding the section of the channel for the flux that comes from there, which is due to something broken within, and through the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time comes that the incision is to be closed, add two layers of the cord from the wound, and with that one alone, close it in such a way as to preserve the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medications that promote healing of the flesh until it is cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the whole of this discourse which we have compiled is nothing but to show that some of these spots have already buried the patient's gullet, and the patient has been brought to the brink of death, and his breath is cut off, and others are going to incise the epiglot so that the patient may breathe over the site of the illness through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, he will keep the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; so now you will command the wound to be thus treated, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant cut open his throat with a knife and incised it in the neck, and I was called to cure him, and I noticed the mucous thus as if it were the cry of the dying, and I uncovered the wound, and discovered the hole from which the pus had come.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you should admit that neither a vein nor an artery was injured, and the pain comes from the disease, and treat it until the fire of sickness is cured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not be hasty in the treatment if it does not require speech, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now it is said that in the section of the epiglot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .XXIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section concerning the apsema which occurs in the gullet outside, and is called a hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apsema, called a hernia of the gullet, is a great apsema according to the color of the body, and it occurs more often in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it has two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, there is no means of cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental has two manners: one is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is apoplexy, which is caused by the sudden interruption of an artery, and that is fearful.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a presumptive diagnosis except for those who ask for help.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should investigate what it is and say to them, if it resembles gouty nodules, and is not obstructed by any of the veins, then you pierce it like a node, and extract that which contains the pus from the skin and abscess; otherwise, you should examine his whole body, and pay close attention to the area that needs treatment until he is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capital .45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the removal of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	These nodules have different species, and I have already described all their species in the previous division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important to distinguish between the node and the hernia with caution.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that a hernia is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain, while the patient feels relief when the excess fluid subsides, and putrefaction completes the process, stopping the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A nodule, on the other hand, shows no signs of heat, fever, or pain, and it is a cold, silent mass that requires surgical removal.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is made thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two kinds, some are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a hernia, you must expel that and inquire about the beginning of the stirment which is called an intrus, according to how its form comes in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all hernias, and it is that you take this stirment and intrude that one into the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around at that spot little by little until you know that this stirment has already penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then, with your hand, you finish according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intrus and consider what has remained in the track of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, you insert it into the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left from the intrusion, then you know it's dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry, having no shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As it is taught, raise it up, and with a cut, remove the cord from all parts easily, and take care of the skin or bag over it, if possible, above that and extract the sanie (sanity/life force) from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the sanity, so try again here, and if you can't extract it safely, leave it within them until there is no further risk.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If from any cause, whether little or much, the pain returns, it should be treated according to custom.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the pain from any cause affects a small part, complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the plague, and place a hot cautery on the one that is infected, and treat the other with another cure until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this method.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If a vein is pulsating against it, or not pulsating, then cut and use the place of a zigzag seal that is made of vitriol and leave that tight for two days or three until the plague subsides and the inflammation of the sanc ceases; and then return to incise what is broken off from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, one of which is larger, and another is middle-sized, and the other is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of aluminum, and of suitable size, so that the instrument fits well into the incision.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods of the experienced ones, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the alchemist.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it is of three parts: one is great, another is middle, and the third is little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, middle:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, little:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, it is indicated for those with apisms, excrescences, fistulas, and hernias, so that those within are of bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus, they are made round, thick, like lions, with large needles sewn onto them, and are done with hot iron, or with bronze, or with silver, and the best are when they are done with hot iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they prepare the experienced ones with black plume, who remember that through these are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which reflections are made, which are reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three kinds: some are long, others medium-length, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the experienced one with black plume:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced one with medium-length plume:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the experienced one with short plume:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the wounds are diverse, some being simple cuts with a slight curvature, and they are classified into three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from their bodies' humors, there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these, there are two types of curves, which are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	They have three types of curves, which are also of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single curve half-way:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single curve very little, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large horn:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a smaller horn, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a very small horn, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large horn has two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a smaller horn has two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a very small horn has two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large horn has three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a smaller horn has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a nail has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels which are used to cut and incise nodules and abscesses, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but instead designed to make a precise cut during the removal of nodules without damaging veins or nerves, and for these reasons, it ensures a quick recovery from surgery and provides comfort, thanks to the adjustment required for excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of weapons, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large magnet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium magnet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small magnet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and look like a flame on which alcohol is burned.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the end of the handle is a pointed spike hidden, which goes into the body and comes out again, as you wish.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of the instruments, which are hidden between these parts during the piercing of the apertures and do not injure the patient, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wounds through which the flow of blood is obstructed are of three kinds; great, medium, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citric erys, either round or of some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And know that these kinds of wounds, great, medium, and small, must be used so that by them the flow of blood is obstructed at the right speed in need, and they are useful when first applied, not as medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using them to obstruct blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy parts, as with the scales of the legs and thighs, and the scales of the arms, and the nipples and abdomen and the groin, similar to their appearance in moist fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times these instruments are made of small blades similar to scissors according to this form; for the incision is made when the vein or artery is cut through phlebotomy, or a wound is incised in a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some incisions are made in a round fashion according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the mammary glands of men, which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some incisions are inflated in the mammary glands of certain men when they begin to be covered with hair during sleep; then the mammary glands are inflated, and the mammary glands of the women are assembled, and they become enlarged, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to treat this, be sure to cut out that section of the moon in the shape from B to G, then remove all the roughness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and close both lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast decreases in size and softens due to its magnitude for women, then cut it into two pieces, each with a slit resembling a moon, of which each contains the other, so that the longer line contains the shorter one according to this form from B to G. Then remove the cord connecting both edges of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders necessary for treatment until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not carry out the incision as required due to restlessness of the patient or flow of pus, then fill the wound with a hot cauterizing ointment and leave it so that it corrodes the pus, which is broken by the heat, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are caused by scalpels, hard and sore, which contain a pus that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised during the moon's half-circle, according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all that is in the abscess has been drained, then secure it with a bandage and inspect it the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage in place and care for it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of lymphatic glands and scrofula appears, then you divide it as we have said in the section about scrofula in general.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague spreads so that it causes putrefaction, then apply cautery to it as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section about abscesses that occur from arrow wounds or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks through and the wound is stabilized, which is on that part, then you observe signs of abscess and the marks by which inflammation and abscess are known to be from an artery or a vein: for when abscess is from an arrow, it's a deep penetration in the body; and when you probe the abscess with your hand, you feel a hissing noise.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through veins returns to the manifest of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this ulcer is often erroneous, especially when it affects the joints, angles, and back, and many parts of the body; as it is very great, therefore care must be taken to avoid its treatment, and that which is in the extremities, or head, must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Regarding those affected by the inflammation of the orifices of the bowels, incise in the long bone at the hip joint; then cut open the section with a saw and remove the bowels, freeing them from the surrounding tissues until they are exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place a needle on it and make it penetrate between the other layers, and tighten the bowels with a double thread at two points — which causes the patient to urinate by drawing out both bowels located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then apply pressure to the area between the two ligaments, spreading them apart until the wound is completely open and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall; and cure it with suitable foment until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess caused by vein section, then you must have your hand over the abscess as much as possible, and insert the needle into the area that you have secured with your hand, and pull out the pus from the other side; and then tie off the abscess with a suitable ligament according to what I have told you about the ligament of grapes on both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert the thin needle into the abscess after making a small incision with the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Close the wound in the middle part of it until it heals, and then you will cut away the surplus of the stitches, leaving what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand on the puddle which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and administer the treatment which is necessary and apply poultices until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	On the final stage of the wound which occurs due to nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, wounds of this type occur in the rear and in veins, and they appear to be caused by nerve damage when they occur due to excessive pressure or similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the treatment is applied in the areas where the joints are affected or in the foot, or indeed anywhere that the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a great ulcer, resembling the color of another body, and it is located in its largest parts, characterized by their disposition, and when it is tightened with violence, pain in it causes a sensation of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an ulcer that is added to the front of the body, and for this reason, the opening is left, and it is painful throughout its entire extent and does not spread towards the sides or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, regarding those who have it in the joints, it is not appropriate to use iron, as they will experience intense contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One may make the opening for those on the head or forehead with a knife.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the ulcer is small, one may use scissors to cut and separate that from the skin.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, hold it with ungents and extract the foreign body, then close it up with bandages, and treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .li.	It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing some context, as "Capitol .li." doesn't offer enough content for an accurate translation or interpretation without additional information about the document's structure or topic. If this is a section title or part of a heading, it could refer to a specific chapter or topic within a larger work. For a more precise response, please provide the complete sentence or paragraph surrounding this segment.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section regarding the treatment of an abscess that occurs near the belly button.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Even some people are moved by certain maladies in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal-like due to their similarity to fungi, whose roots are subtle and the heads of which are large; and already their lips are covered, and it is from these that a magnified one is sought.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts that served as functions similar to each other, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were inverted and cracked, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut them and tighten the first one on the foot's big toe, which is about 18 units long, and the other one on a smaller toe, approximately 6 units long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure for cutting them involves considering whether the patient's illness is moist, and the color of the abscess is white, moist, and of fine size; then you cut them with a broad knife, and apply hot cautery over them in the presence of your eyes, as you must drive out the pus, and if blood comes out, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and trembling, beware of sudden movement with a sharp object; then take a fresh piece of lead, tighten it in that tool whose method we have described, and leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead string; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead after it has been divided and comes out by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is of thick consistency, then in the incision there is no cause for fear or anxiety, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you open the hernia, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care so that it is healed as the disease goes away.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and firmly attached, for that is absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us recall certain things regarding this illness.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons: either through fissures in the abdominal wall, from which protrudes the intestine or hernia, as is the case with other ruptures; or by a vein or artery that flows into it (sanct), as described above; or by flatulence (ventositat) that is constrained within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the protrusion of the intestine (hernia), then the color of the hernia may resemble that of the body; and it is accompanied by considerable pain, appearing in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the removal of the hernia, you observe the position of that part which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and when you press on that lump, it is concealed, then return; it is strongly attached to its place, and the introduction of water and vigorous work is magnified.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, you will feel a lump and it will not be concealed when you press with your hand, nor constricted nor ripped.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these signs will appear: the hernia will turn black and decline in size.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the hernia will be very hard, thick and solid, and it will remain in a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of that part will be painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it considers whether the prominence of the navel is due to arrowhead, or vein, or flatulence; then you must refrain from treating it, for there is fear and dread in that, as is taught in the chapter where I spoke of hernias due to arrowheads and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must instruct the patient to lie on his side, and carefully explore all around the navel, and command him to remain still between your hands on his back, and then encircle a broad spatula around the navel in the place where you felt the attempt; and extend the extent of the hernia above it with great care; and bind around the circumference with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the middle of the hernia extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that indicated place to explore the intestine; and if you have tightened or guarded it with the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have located the fabric, then take that sticky substance; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is against your skill or vein, then circle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the circuit you made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will cause penetration; and then tighten the abscess in four directions over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you prefer, leave the needles and allow the area to heal until the flesh is extended and falls out on its own; or cut away that part when it becomes subtile and can be removed, and then treat that wound with something that covers and heals the burns until it is completely cured.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion from the navel is due to flesh or moisture, cover the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have discussed, in the previous section, the types of cracks and how treatment should be approached using medicine, and that it is dangerous to use sharp objects on them so as not to cause ulceration. We have also spoken about the causes of cracks and precautions for their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cracks can be in places where it is possible to completely eliminate them, such as crack in the nipples or in the genital area and similar parts of other members, especially when they are just beginning to form.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and deep, it may not respond to treatment, for I have never seen it heal nor has anyone else, nor has it been known to improve.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is as we have said, you should precede and remove the illness and purge some times with black choleric blood, then drain it if a manifest refill is observed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the hernia for the operation with a preparation in which it is located, and make incisions around it; and carefully explore all parts with the knife to avoid any cause of rupture from the patient's internal pressures.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then let the blood flow, do not stop it abruptly, press on the areas, and wash away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument suitable from among your available tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it causes you difficulty to make an incision of thick blood from a vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then tend to the other wound with the proper cure until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the distinction between the types of hydrops and their characteristic symptoms, regarding their cure by medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of inflammation alone, and it should not be approached with iron to the species of tympanitis or the species of hypostasis, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanitis with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the illness has already been weakened in the patient, or it is another malady other than hydrops, just as it is in those with coughs or abdominal pains similar to those, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you find the disease with exuberant growth and it is not another malady but gout only, without swelling or inflammation, then the manner of treating it is that you lift up the malady between your hands, apply pressure to it with your hand, express the belly of the patient by pressing it, drain the water from the affected part below the penis, and take out the sputum in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both parts should be cut with a sharp, long knife, from the acutely pointed end, also taking out some sputum; however, in performing the operation on that, do not let it enter the cavity, and take care to remove it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of gout is from the cavities, for you will find that by cutting into the side of the abdomen below the navel, in the right place over the penis, you remove about three parts.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of gout is due to disease of the bowels, then your section should be on the left side of the navel, about three parts deep.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the formation of it is due to heat, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your section is on the side where the pain resides so that excess fluid does not flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then thoroughly punch with the instrument through the cord, enter that section, place your hand between the cord and sinew, and extract it; if it is of the size of a finger or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the sinew until the space is reached that you wish to reach, and it is located in the area of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then remove that one and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a fine silver cannula; made of silver, brass, or iron, from which, at the beginning where it is inserted, there is a small hole, and on its sides are three openings: two on one side and one on the other; and the tip is cut according to the manner of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it, a crown-like ring is placed, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately withdraw over the instrument, thus evacuating a significant quantity of water at once; for if you evacuate less than necessary in one go, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit or be subject to a sudden stroke that brings death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuation should be done according to the patient's condition, based on the disposition of their illness, the strength of their vital spirit, and the goodness of their pulse.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after removing the instrument, retain the water that is caused because it is often held back by the cord that catches the tract over which you have made incisions; I recommend that you make those according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the process with the instrument on other days if the illness tolerates it, evacuate a little water from it, and do this for several days in fear; be careful not to break the water seal except slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the illness, and abstain from a great amount of water, then treat it with burial in dry sand, and sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and press on it to extract water, as I have recounted in what has been said above.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who have not yet developed the ability to control their bladder functions.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children pass stool from their mother's womb, and the opening of their mix (or it is too narrow or not in the correct place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, make an incision in the hernia as soon as it appears through the thin, moving spatum in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, close the wound with a thin lead pin and tie it, and do this for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they have urinated, let them strain and collect the urine; then return it to the patient.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the lead still, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the area will not adhere to this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one through which the wound is narrow should be treated with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the wound is not in its place, they should be treated thus, which causes them, because of the nature of the injury, the pain is at the root of the penis so that it cannot urinate inside, unless it raises the penis with the hand above them; and it is not a hereditary condition, therefore, because of this, the sperm does not reach the mother according to its rectitude, and it becomes a very weak malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the technique for performing the operation is that the patient should be laid on their back, and then extend the head of the stone with your left hand using strong traction, and cut the tip of the stone at the opening of the urethra with a sharp knife, as if making an incision with a feather, so that the middle part of the stone appears like the head of the stone and falls into the correct place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation of draining the pus, for what causes it to happen; place yourself over it so that you cut the pus and heal the wound while it is still fresh.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albater (or gum) that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of its corruption, blackness, and adhesions to the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Moistures observed cause this albater (white substance) on the scrotum and its flesh prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, it requires a delicate suspension and removal of the affected part; then place your hand over the submerged area with an Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure it with finely prepared ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the albater (white substance) is malignant, it turns black; then you must administer cautery near its incision and ration it accordingly.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the albater (white substance) is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the albater is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must treat the albater that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; and when you cure the outer part, remember that if you do not circumcise, the foreskin may become tight again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And they examine the genitals and the dark, inflamed prepuce, so that you understand all that is already discolored, corrupt or decomposing; then apply to that place a poultice made of flour from crushed millet, wheat and barley seeds, mixed with herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And apply treatment to that, as with any other healing process, until it is completely healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an end of pain, then administer cautery monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	This cautery is useful for two purposes: to relieve pain and to treat infections when they are corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a metal tube into the meat of the prepuce so that the discharge from the infection passes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required on it; when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), carefully excise the thick spatum with an obtuse scalpel until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you must excise with a scalpel for some cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, easily perforates itself slightly due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then carefully separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin knife, which has already been soaked in water to prevent further adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be carefully cleaned with a hemostatic agent until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of newborn children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for impurity, nor is it compared to other plagues: however, when it concerns our action and our own will, and it is performed specifically on children, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and way a lighter approach for the sake of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, as they do not include it in their laws, and only because we have acquired knowledge through experience, which is why I have attributed the major part of this practice to skilled craftsmen and barbers, who use a sharp knife and cautery; they also use lint and a fingernail for incision.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and do not find better relief than with scissors, lint, or thread that in circumcision, as the cut of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer is left, and it is often necessary to make another incision and a safe, sure cut.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And circumcision, which is performed by cutting, using the digit (finger), a method used by barbers, is not secure for making an incision at the tip of the male member, as it quickly enters the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, with the use of scissors or other instruments, it quickly becomes messy and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in many cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	On the operation that is performed using scissors and thread, I have discovered through experience its great usefulness, because the scissors are of a suitable size for incision, thus preserving the sharpness that is present at one end, and with your hand positioned in proportion to both ends, you make incisions according to a calculation in time; and so there is compression of the thread forming a loop containing all the strands of pain, from which no error arises.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first step in the operation is that you ensure the child remains awake if it is one of those who can understand a little, doing nothing but tying the thread to their pain and allowing it to enter into the other on the following day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do all you can in that way to bring joy to someone who understands this, according to their ability.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And ensure that person is well-rested and prepared, without being weary; keep the scissors hidden in your hand or place your foot so that the child does not see those or any other surgical tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it by filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then, close the incision with a signet ring, tie it tightly with a thin thread, place your finger on the wound and indicate its location to another person, then insert a blade between two sutures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, lift the rectum slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; clean the fissure thoroughly with a small amount of lard, spread it over a cloth in which mugwort has been boiled in water mixed with oil, and apply that to the wound for the next day; treat that with appropriate care until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the instruments for cleansing, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities should not be of unequal length; the others should be such that the radius of the bone is not left out, and the length of both acute angles is equal to the length of two handbreadths.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Do not make the mistake of removing the intrinsic tension entirely, or deviating from it during the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the one from your hand to your finger in front of the aperture of the place and make an incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your finger, extract it with a hook and make an incision on that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days and they say that it is swollen under the infected scar, then you should leave it until the scar becomes soft, and pull it out gently, make an incision on it, according to what you are prepared for.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, so as not to damage it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	So therefore treat that part which the plague has hardened due to the powders we have discussed in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the cord within measure, and follows the rules regarding them, it will not affect it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to that part which we have said should be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or infection, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those we have discussed regarding treatment in the sections (i.e., chapters).
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it persists due to pressure from what is already in the bladder's neck, then be aware that the disease is still bent over its own hindparts.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then you should rest the patient's feet on someone else's back and stretch their belly away from their spine as far as possible, and the disease will tighten its grip on them to the greatest extent.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the bladder's neck is constricted, it prevents the expulsion of urine into the rear parts, so the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said does not dissolve it, then be aware that you must extract it from the disease using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: Both silver and thin as a lion's jaw, with a tube of fine hair like a long needle in similarity to a palm and a half, to which is attached a thin cane at the tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination is as follows: take the folded bladder and tie it at the end with a thread or string for good closure; insert the ends of the bladder into the urethra, cut them with scissors if any cause requires cutting off the string, but more carefully insert it into the catheter with force, and then place the urethra near the edge and fill it with honey and alum.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply compresses to the pain on the skin, drain the vesica and varices with oils mixed with honey, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the urethra with ease until it reaches the root of the varice; and bend the varic over the opening of the catheter; and push the urethra from inside; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and ensure that the pain is relieved from its cause; and do not force it in a hasty manner, but rather carefully insert it into the part where it is bent.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the urethra using the forceps, as the urine dries the linen.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the treatment of urine, using forceps, without ceasing to do so, and use a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition improves.
Capitol .lix.	**Chapter LIX.**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder clisting using a clepsydra and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When a bladder ulceration, fistula, or infected swelling occurs there, and you wish to drain waters and medications from it, use an instrument known as a clepsydra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if its opening in the extreme part is blocked, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts to it: two of one kind, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, it is hot, which is what is being pushed, and according to its quantity, it accumulates or piles up; if any cause pulls it away from its humors, they are thrown out, and when they are expelled, they are thrown towards it, and when they come out long, according to what causes them to solidify, like naphtha in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to prevent humors in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humor and throw it away from the parts above, for the humor is thrown into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp into the urethra as we have mentioned in the operation; and push the humor towards what you are pushing, for that humor goes to the bladder soon enough, and the evil comes from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal which the bladder is crystalized on, and that shape is:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And whether it is made of silver or lead, which the head resembles a small feather, and leave it with a sticky substance inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder with motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then close it between two strong ligatures with double twine, and heat that humidity over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystalizer into the urine.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with pressure until the patient feels that that humidity has already penetrated into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then pierce that through its entirety; and insert the twine strongly into those passages, turning them around; and add the circle to the container thus enriched with also urine and water, as you wish.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you insert that into the instrument and make it so as you have made the bladder, and express with your hand within so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXX (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention with the hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they recount that this manifest exposure and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that the disease born in the bladder most often affects children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its clarity, appearing in that sand; and the illness rubs its sting, causing frequent pain, and then is dressed; and this is why they call it "the wound" because of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that condition is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Among the young, it is more common due to what exists between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, in order to achieve the cure for that condition, we must begin by cleansing the disease with Christ, who extracts all the gap that is within their intestines; for that gap sometimes blocks the flow of urine before its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then, with the disease in their feet, they should position and support it well so that urine descends to the bladder's opening, or sometimes it may jump from its place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then use that tool between your hands, prepared, and let the patient's legs rest with their things in place, so that the bladder is completely emptied towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then take hold of that and completely remove all those discharges.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then immediately place a sword over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch hold of everything, cover it with oil the little indicated by the thumb of your left hand, whether the hernia is a child or its little piece if it is fully grown, and insert that into its place.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And once the stone is extracted, leave the little indicated place as it is.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small opening little by little into the hole of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure on that small place indicated, and expel it outside through the opening where you removed it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above, and with their other hand to hold the skin around the opening where the operation is performed, drawing it away from the wound.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a sharp instrument into the opening from which this mass protrudes.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It divides into what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle of the opening, first on the left side; and the incision should be above that bone and it is said to be in the anus, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cutout is wide and inwardly narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the anus without causing too much difficulty, for the saying goes that the anus must be divided, and this should not be forgotten.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some part of the anus that has angles and margins, making its extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that part, there is something resembling a seed, and it is round, and it is made of the lighter extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily removed, cover your hands over it, or tighten it with a suitable gesture, the tip of which is as sharp as lime, that you tighten over the stone, and do not dislodge it; or insert from the sides a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see a flow of pus, cut and tighten it with vitriol three times.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut it; then gently push a little water in; and seemingly make them both move more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very intense, ignorance consists in perforating that great section, which causes two things to happen to the patient: either death or an increase in the discharge of urine, due to continuous urination, which weakens the area and makes it not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If it is necessary to expel something from the bowels that is stuck inside, or if there is a fracture with scissors that extract those in the pelvis, use forceps to carefully remove them.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	After completing your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed and do not remove the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is loosened, apply the area with water and oil, then treat it with a delicate ointment and a potent ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of an infection, there is gangrene and corrosion, and it appears as if the cold has seized the bladder, and due to this the urination is hindered (and this is known as the discharge of urine), then insert a small tube into the plague and extract that pus, for if it does not drain, it can cause corruption and putrefaction in the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with wine, water, and salt, and oppose it to all kinds of things that are suitable for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the stages of healing, make sure that you both cover and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, causing urination to be obstructed, treat it with what you have previously described, as the stones passed through this treatment are often blamed for urethral obstruction; take a metal probe of suitable size, which has this form.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, lodged in the wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take hold of the thread, and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the metal into the urethra, piercing it until the probe reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, continuing to pierce until you make an opening from the other side; then urine will flow out.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then apply your hand to what is broken off from the stone in the kidney, outside the bladder, as it is squeezed and voided with urine, and the illness is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason, then insert a thread into the kidney and another thread on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close the kidney within that bladder between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the binding and clean the frozen blood, which is made in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to insert a thread into the kidney, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other binding on top, because when the thread is removed, the kidney returns to its place, and the pain comes back again.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this purpose, when you tie the bandage around them, you must raise their legs to the level of their heart, or return them to their normal position, and secure the bandage as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of kidney stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Kidney stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in either of those areas (kidneys), its treatment is difficult and is prohibited by various methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their weaknesses is that women who are strong in other respects can become pregnant.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second weakness is that you will not find a woman more knowledgeable than herself to discover if she should consult a doctor when she is pregnant, or whether she belongs to those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The surface is what you do not search well, as women often do not know this art, especially the operation with fire.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of incision on the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, so it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, you must seek help from a skilled female surgeon, and they are not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking in that, seek out a skilled surgeon with a keen and subtle hand, or present a well-respected female midwife who has extensive experience in the care of women.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do as follows: present this person and command them to carry out everything you instruct, from examining the stone to its removal. The reason for this is that they must determine if the woman is a virgin, so they should insert their finger into her anus and carefully extract the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, cut it off and then order him to incise on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not possible, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and feel around on the bladder, as she places her left hand on the vesica, and feel it carefully.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, cut away gradually, from the opening of the bladder to the edges, with great care and using all your strength, so that it reaches inside the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision over that position of the bladder, starting from the opening of the thigh, and direct it towards the part where the urethra is stopped, and ensure his finger does not go back inside the urethra.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at first; then insert your finger over that section, and if you feel the urethra, adjust the incision according to the amount, knowing how much urine will flow from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the spices of the pear are varied: for some are small and hard, others are large and soft, some are pointed and sharp, and others are round and smooth.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know how many species there are of it according to what you have mentioned about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to treat a wound, apply arsenic trioxide to the affected area and let it sit for an hour until the wound is drained, then return to your operation to remove the pear.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the instruments mentioned in the removal of pear in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to treat a wound and know that the expulsion of pus is from the deep incision, then place powder on the area and gently apply pulvils (herbal compresses) and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not extract it, for the strong nature of the disease will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the pain subsides after a few days, and the place can be touched, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia removal.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia of the inguinal region is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white skin where the muscles containing the bowels are left open, and it is called the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the natural pouch which prepares itself for the bowels, as if it were another bowel; and it is the opening of the muscle between the white skin that we have mentioned, and it is not a true hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the bones, so that this material is discharged to those, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow made on the bones.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it either declines to citron or sanguine, or is red, or is black and viscous, or is white and watery, and it is that which is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water occurs are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining slightly in length, with a figure like an egg, and the bone appears, because the humidity contains that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own panicle, then the swelling becomes round and parted from the bone, and therefore one estimates that it is another bone.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if moisture is between the joints of the fingers and the white bone, then cut away the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the colour of the moisture, you should observe the colour of the moisture in the cavity as it emerges from a cut made in the affected part; and according to what you see in the trace of the emergence, judge what lies within.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be fleered (or "flaccid") if possible, and empty his bowels.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then lay him down on his back for some time, for any reason, and place a warm blanket over him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the patient's left side, and instruct the attendant to follow his right side, extending his finger from two fingers' breadth below the joints of the fingers to the bone at the base of the thumb, as well as to the opening of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and cut through the tight band of tissue at the middle of the thigh along its entire length near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the second cut according to the same measurement from the line where you have separated the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white bone completely encompassing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And remove it, and observe, and pay attention so that you do not insert anything; your incision should be clear and distinct, and carefully examine the wound according to its quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then, pierce the full bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then, separate the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend the bone to its parts; do not touch the band of tissue surrounding the genitals, and incise the bone in that manner as best as you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise the affected area completely or into the flesh, and especially its thin layer, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is a risk that the water does not drain out.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If, during the process of removing the hernia outside of the abdominal wall in the course of your operation, you have completed the section of the circumference of the hernial sac, then return inside it and properly adjust both edges of the hernia from the genital area with sutures, and take care of it just as you do with other wounds, so long as it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the hernia is corrupted by another illness, then tie the vessels that are above the suspender, extract the hernia, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is added in two parts, then you know that both are hernias; therefore, make an incision on that part according to what you have done with the other in a different manner; and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then, you wash the wound, and enter the sections with wool submerged in oil or rose-oil; place another piece of wool that you've soaked in wine and oil outside, expanding it over both legs and the wonder of the belly; and rest it on folded cloths and pillows, and wrap those around with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then, take two pieces of cloth and wrap them with woolen tape according to this pattern; secure the extremities with lint or wet wool, add structure in the crotch area of the pants, taking one extremity from the buttocks towards the two, and the second extremity from the opening of the legging, and place two other extremities on each side, leaving two others over the thighs, and all the tightness should be adjusted in the crotch area of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision; so you take a thin cut-edge cautery and make an incision at that joint of the bones, and it should be ignited according to what we have recommended until the white skin containing the water becomes uncovered, and then take cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that seal, and ignite it until all moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the seal with scissors, cut it with scissors, and burn it gently with a finely lit cautery; incise it as best you can until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is much safer and farther from the flow of infection, and better than an operation with a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you difficulty to apply a cautery during the section or at the time of burning, or if there is a flow of infection, then address that which opposes you through treatment for that, as suitable care according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the illness is severe and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horrendous nature, then perform an incision as recommended; and it is at this point, as we have said regarding signs, that you must determine if that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you understand that you must sever the illness on a raised spot, then perform an incision at the lowest point of the pus collection using a sharp knife, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it should be a wide opening so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area, pressing gently to ensure the flow of water stops.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then attend to it until the affliction is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is any contradiction to the draining of water at that time, you perforate it: this should only be done because the white panniculus in the orifice of the abscess causes resistance and prevents the discharge of water; then make sure to insert into the abscess a needle or instrument for extracting water, the shape of which precedes; or apply a small amount of pressure on the abscess.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that water returns and accumulates again after a few months or even years; and when it is added, it should be perforated in the same manner as mentioned above, because the illness will thus pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in performing surgery on this hernia, there is great danger of losing the patient; for it is my opinion that its discharge and rescue by some better means should be sought.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And they are reminded of the operation on those and the spices of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it says that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of them, and this is done for various reasons: either by a sudden acute inflammation, which is poured into the genera, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in it, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very few are the lapified abscesses, of which the color is dark, and they do not cause pain in them.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is made by the compression of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those thus already perceived in memory, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that what is due to the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of gangrene when you feel it in your legs, and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression on them is necessary.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this particular case, incisions are made and on other meats; you insert the instrument of the skilled surgeon, then open the hernia from its parts, extract the white lump, cut through the suspenders of the vessels, tie them, and insert the suspender from which you have cut, making sure to do so with all parts of the hernia.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the hernia is already consolidated among those meats, then you should extract it and make an incision on it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the body or between structures, you should remove all that adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the adhesion is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion, behind it, then you should cut all that belongs to it and extract it as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool saturated in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that affect the viscera.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an aperture (hernia) enveloped by some similar growth, softening the testicles, and makes movement, exercise, and walking over the affected area difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, caution is required regarding what precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I note that they mention operation in that second step which I described as "treatment.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you should cease the illness over a raised pillow; then, gently pull the suspender of the testicles towards the body; and take hold of the chains of the genitals with your hands placed on the testicles, which have been proven effective against the pain; and have other assistants as well, and extend them to their full extent with force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then, cut with a sharp knife across the path of the vessels, as long as the vessels remain uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from every part as we have said in the removal of arrows, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with two threads, attach it to the first point where the pain occurs, and do the same again at the last part of their.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make incisions in the middle part of the body at a slight angle according to its length, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the infection with a cure for other infections in which you wish to prevent the formation of vessels that block one or both openings, as it is not harmful for this purpose.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then remove either the testicles or constrict them through the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and become atrophied, or tie them off so that they are no longer useful to those parts.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the wall of the abdomen, extending from the blood vessels of the abdominal cavity, allowing the intestines to protrude through the opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either of the wall or an protrusion of the intestine, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movements, shouting, lifting a heavy object, or similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the wall, occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it presents as a swelling that pushes inward into the cavity because the abdomen contains the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is a cutting in the flesh, for at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is an apparent abscess appearing behind the knee, which is due to protrusion of the intestine, and the matter from it comes out of the body through the opening in the flesh.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the intestine's membrane is forgotten and this is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the hernia gap, and here it gets stuck, which is a great hindrance to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be careful, so as to avoid the mistake in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand inside the hernia, and then press it between your fingers, and raise the legs of the patient.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the ligature which is the ligature of the testicles at their attachment, and cut the ligature of the testicles entirely through; and fix in two folds of the section incised as you need to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to make, then from that the hole will be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape away those bodies which are left by the ligature of the testicles, until the white hard body of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into what is the testicle, where the white body is between, which is left by the ligature, and between the second body, and loosen that adhesion which is behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then take hold of the ligature of the testicles at its attachment, and thus extend the white body on it with your left hand, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and command the assistant to spread the testicle wide open, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek out the threads that indicate there is no cause for the hernia enclosed in the hard white ciphas.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause for it within the patient, then search for it in the lower abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a strong, smooth thread of silk, and insert it through the last layer of the ciphas, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is cut; and cut the ends of the thread that emerge from the silk within four layers, and tie them to some object in the shape of a cross; and attach this to the ciphas from which we said the cord of the testicles was severed tightly on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly together, ensuring that none of the vessels through which these pass can transmit any cause for infection to occur from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And another time, apply the poultice according to the first application, three days apart; then remove these two poultices from the side where the scrotum's tendons are attached, in proportion to their size, and cut off all excess padding, leaving only what is necessary.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make a cut in the scrotum just below the tendon of the testicles, from which blood and pus will flow as we have mentioned above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; leave it there; and use the poultice we have recommended (and sometimes white cautery, as we said, is used after incision, for it has been observed that these cause bleeding) and change the poultice until it falls off on its own.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is severe, then apply cold water compresses and leave them on until it falls off, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the plague with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Capitol LXVI.**
De hernia ventosa.	Of herniated wind.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that indicates it has been treated with fire.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done thus as we have recomposed in the hernia which is by sight; which is that you lie the vessels close to the section over that part of him with ease; and then dry around the middle place with something that works, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that is done in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, tears occur in the angles as we have said, and they expose the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not mention any cause of hernias to the patient; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, a suitable opening should be made in the wall within before the hernia descends into the wall; this happens due to the enlargement of the wall, which we have mentioned, causing it to become stretched, and then hardened, and the area becomes inflamed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with cautery, as we have previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes, it is cured by cutting, so that the patient lies on their back between two cushions, and then the area of the rupture is dried with a section according to the extent, in three parts.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white strap that is below the spine until it is completely exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the needle and place it over the most prominent part of the spine, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then locate the two prominent points on the end of the spine needle, and adjust the suture from one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the end of the needle, without inserting it into the spine or extending the wound, or any other cause as you should be aware in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Then apply the treatment for the plague, and when you cut away the pus, clean it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; for the spine is contracted and the prominent point of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	**Capitol .lxviii.**
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testes becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues surrounding it, and this is a matter that requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one in charge of the treatment of this condition to position the patient according to their side, and uncover all the softened cord, extending it beyond its natural position; and then form two lips over the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if desired, at the beginning, you can remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and a secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the sutures; and carefully care for other ailments within, ensuring their healing and the falling out of the filth.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxix.
De castracio.	About castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembrance, I will discuss it in this book; and the remembrance of it is necessary only through two means: one, so that when a doctor is asked about it, he knows the treatment for those who suffer from it; and the other way is that we ourselves may sometimes have need to castrate other animals for our young, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by making an incision to cut through.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case where it is performed by constriction, the method of surgery consists in cutting off the animal while it is still alive, so that the genitals remain soft and flexible, and they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then apply those bandages with your hand so that they are secure and do not appear loose.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration, the incision is made through a split and sectioning, ensuring that you hold the animal firmly and use your left hand to press on the cord of the testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then attach the suspensory, and incise on either side of each hoop with a sectioning cut until two hoops have processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those pus that you have extracted from each excoriated area.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any of those from the neck any cause, but rather the subtle phlegm that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one performed by cutting, as the strong binding leaves no cause for the testicles of the animal to swell and desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	**Chapter LXX**
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	**On the Cure for Hermaphroditism**
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men exists in two manners: one where there is an abnormality or appearance of tissue in the scrotal region that resembles female genitalia, featuring ovaries and uteruses; and another where there are characteristics of both male and female sexual organs coexisting within a single individual.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, this condition causes urination issues located in the scrotal area where the testes are situated.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a specific condition: the female clitoris resembles two male testes, although slightly smaller, located just inside the vagina, similarly to a man's penis with two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: from two men and from one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	For it is necessary that you understand those tight meats within which the discharge of that impurity escapes, and then cure them with the treatment of other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from whom urine is discharged in the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the springtime and flesh prominent due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The prominent vein is tightly adjusted due to natural causes, as it is stressed, and it should be examined carefully; sometimes it becomes enlarged in some women just as it does in men, and even during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take a quantity of lard in your hand or with a knife and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with incisions, especially at the joints, so as to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then take care of that as part of the cure for the plague until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May be a new growth is the flesh that does not have the horror of the mother, filling it from within, and strongly leans towards the exterior according to appearance like a feather (and for this some call it "tailed ill health"); therefore, it is necessary to insert into it as we insert lard, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure for arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	It is important that the woman's vulva be neither perforated nor overly stretched.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental refers to illness that precedes it, and it is caused either by improper diet or subtle and deep-seated impurities.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is manifested in the lower back, or in the sides, or above the anus, and it prohibits movement and procreation and childbirth, and strongly suppresses menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of this condition is achieved through careful examination of the patient, if the swelling is apparent, then it is treated; however, if it is not apparent, you should seek its presence in the patient's urine or breath.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the oppression is due to a subtle infection, especially affecting both lips, then cut and rupture it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that it presses on both soft lips, and then you should press your fingers on both the most sensitive points.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then stretch both lips with force until that subtle infection is ruptured and the oppression is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it on the area, and keep applying heat to that place every day so that the incision does not harden.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the infection is thick and dense, then cover that with a broad spatula or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for flesh, then suspend it from a hook and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and bandages, adjusted to the patient's skin.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead needle so that the infection does not solidify prematurely.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and administer water from the spring.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And it is healed with the other cure of consolidation until it is completely cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and then you must cut according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is so for a cramp in the leg, the cramp in the leg which is in the greatest severity should not be caused by any manner of strain.
Capitol .lxxiii.	**Capitol .lxxiii.**
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red boils that occur in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the dilatation of veins within, rather than those that burst and cause a continuous flowing of blood; when hemorrhoids are old and hardened, they become painful.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And you have already mentioned in the classification the species of those [diseases], and the signs of those, and to say thus which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the prostrate state of the sick and do not appear in sensation, then in those there is no use of iron [or possibly a type of medicine] for treatment.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those which are within the anus, over which sensation exists, are those which are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be careful that you place the woman on a soft bed and then stretch her out with your hands, or use a rough cloth, and cut those at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle over those parts the flow of sacred medicine from one of the powdered substances, thus as with oak and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then massage their feet for an hour and then immerse them in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of the medicine persists, then make a decoction from adding and mixing many grains and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, and make a paste from this over the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the stone is detached, it is good; otherwise, adhere two suction cups and make incision on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse it in a solution of colander juice or nettle juice or guaravier juice with vinegar, and adhere it to the area; then care for the place with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Do not touch the sore that is of sharp pain; be careful to insert what appears to you from this according to the previous mention in thorough cleansing.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket by accident in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses occur in the body, such as cracks, abscesses, ulcers, blisters, eruptions, fistulas, bleeding hemorrhoids, and swellings, among others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments, their types, and the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you mentioned in this medical treatise about the cautery for abscesses that occur in the body, which is a common practice when dealing with such infections, and if you wish to know the manner in which this operation is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider that in the early stages of an abscess, the pain is sharp due to inflammation and fever, and sometimes there is swelling. If you observe this sensation without perforation, do not puncture it, but treat it with something that aids its maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms diminishes.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then place the woman on her side on a couch that has two cushions; she should recline on her back, aligning her feet at the opening below the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, placing her arms by her sides, and securing her with some bandage accordingly.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the head of the woman and administer the instrument that opens the wound of the mother, the shape of which will be appropriate for those conditions that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And be mindful when administering this instrument that you hold the edge of the mother's wound of the woman, and whatever part of the instrument enters into the mother should not be more than the edge of the mother's wound and harm the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the edge of the mother's wound, be mindful that you should apply poultices over the texture of the mother's wound so that no part of the instrument enters into the mother's wound.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And be careful that you hold the direction of the flow that runs in the instrument of the suture most uppermost, and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the flow until the opening of the main wound is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears and it is touched with the hand and becomes hot and moist, be careful that you immediately clean the head of it with a large spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And after the discharge is evacuated, be careful that you place in the wound a sponge soaked in warm oil or oil with some astringent, and apply pressure in the section in the vicinity of the main wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then remove the dressing from the wound and place on it a clean cloth soaked in lukewarm water containing calamine.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is cured in two days with the application of what suits it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother and plague are washed with water and honey, and then added to water in which the root of iris or a long tongue of aristology is boiled, and finally the mixture is returned.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the plague is deeply embedded in the affected area, you will need to be prohibited from treating it with fire, instead following the method we have discussed above.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to care for stillbirths, so that the embryos' lives may be saved according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the beginning of the natural childbirth through signs of it, and this is when you see the woman pushing at the contractions and desires to smell the air, and she is lifted up because of what is happening above her, and the quickening of the embryo occurs. At this point, you will know that this delivery is according to a natural figure, and it is the coming out of the child on its head, or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will know that the mother's abdomen is contracted so that the embryo can be delivered slightly, and it seeks the second stage, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who deviates from this practice is not natural or commendable, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is positioned with her head below her feet and her hands either at her sides or on her chest, or her head and hands above her feet, or her belly pressed against her spine, and she bends sharply over her pelvis, resembling figures that are not to be believed.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For legitimate reasons, the midwife must be wise and subtle in all these matters, and she should guard against errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And having thus shown all the signs, and since there is an art involved in these things, it signifies that this has been done for a reason and has been based on it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the condition is situated on the head by natural excess, and it is intense in women and affects them in a difficult way, and its virtue is already weakened, then do that sear, or what women have, and evaporate the heat of it with fennel seed and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then insert the meter between their dilated orifices, and apply pressure to it with that second instrument, or rather, use your finger within it to drain what is present in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a mixture of bird feather down and fenugreek meal.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command them, control the contraction, which should be reversed and make them sneeze in this condition; also close their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both sides of the wound are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a mattress and lift her legs up, then carefully lay the mattress on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the wounds are not thoroughly healed and the fetus dies, then cut those open and remove the debris from the fetus or bind the body to the bed with drapes and remove it equitably, as that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the placement of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus moves to its feet, then you must gently push them up, and gradually turn the fetus, and then draw one of them closer, and take a foot of it and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are situated within the thighs, then command them to expel, and make him vomit in this condition, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten about what we have recommended, then return the small thing little by little until it reaches that second natural position, for that will be forgotten through the lighter mentioning.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do everything we have recommended, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good percussion, and apply it directly to the hernia of the woman, at the base of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And apply that compress in boiled water, as long as it reaches the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the discharges from him have stopped being putrefied, then make him inhale mist and submerge him in it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the fumigation for an hour, you should stop it on a cushion, then make the patient sneeze and expel the air from their mouth, take away the cushion, and press the lower part of their belly with a light compression, as the effect will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Examination of the patient's hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition appears in this manner, you should gradually insert your hands, female nurse, with the patient's head inclined over their chest and their legs hanging down; she should sit on the edge of the bed, placing her hands as support.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And you should gently press on the patient's belly, slowly extracting what is left in their feet from the joints, as they prepare for the final expulsion.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the effect is not felt, take the patient's feet and move them vigorously, then gently press on the hips, slowly, until the expulsion occurs.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then I insert my hands and narrow the opening little by little, commanding the woman to express herself until the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The fetus is located longitudinally hanging from one of my hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use ingenuity in reducing the woman's hand, but if you cannot do that, then elevate the woman and try to achieve it that way.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it is impossible to achieve that, then make the woman lie down, and with forceful contractions, manipulate her body parts until labor begins, and then administer medications that you have at hand and which are effective in relieving pain.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And when childbirth has occurred, then make the woman lie down on her side, and carefully study the reduction of the hand, and guide the fetus back into its natural position, and have the woman sneeze, and command her to press herself until the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The expansion of the body's muscles and fascia at two times its normal size indicates the condition.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should have her hand on the fetus and gradually turn it, ensuring this movement is easy.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is fully extended and its tip is in the position we have recommended using oil and mucus, then pause there.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then you should command the patient to move their legs little by little, and when you have done this, make them lie on their side and command them to bend over slightly, then ask them to change position; and have them sneeze in this condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare for the exit of the fetus on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you encounter a hemorrhage from the mother according to this manner, consider it and then insert the second knife with your finger until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the matter is suspended over the face and neck, then cut into that of the embalic so that it is not retained and suffocates.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the matter to the sides until it stops according to its nature, and order the woman to buy herself some lighter items, and then it will be removed by vomiting, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twins are born together, and sometimes three or four, which is strange and difficult; but it can also be due to nature, not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, when they are multiplied, a second one appears, separated by calculation, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in each person's navel and some cases are forgotten as if it were an act of natural leaning, and sometimes they are located by an unperceptible cause as we have recalled.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to understand due to their birth and it comes to what we have said about non-natural figures, then treat them as we have recalled.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does it in such a way that it becomes easier and more timely, and she is ingenious according to each figure as they have prepared her with the appropriate means for healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes miscarriages occur in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is often necessary to determine if a woman has aborted or if she is completely formed, which is determined by the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, how strong she should be towards that young one resembling this, and thus should pay close attention to it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the removal of the fetus that is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have discussed in the section on treatment and it is not expelled externally, and you are compelled to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy constitution and not subject to any conditions that could lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now place the woman on her side with her left side uppermost, and tilt her head downwards while raising her legs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The midwife should hold both parts or grasp them on the side to prevent the body's matter from spreading during delivery.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucus from fennel and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife rubs her hand with these oils and mucus, smoothens the mother's skin, and searches for the spot where the baby's claws are embedded.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the right place is found: then consider if the baby is ready to come out on its head, and keep hold of its claws in the feet, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or leave it with its beard, or in the fork of its bones, or in places near the ribs, or below the hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the onset is in the feet of the patient, then it occurs in the toes or in the middle of the spine.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And you should have the index finger of your right hand cover it, and pause the curvature of the body at that place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your other hand easily and position the index finger in one of those places we mentioned, so as to reach the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then you should pause and stay in the position of him with another finger, or the third if necessary, so that it is equally attractive, and not extended according to its rectitude only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it is beneficial at every step, so that the presence of him is also removed as it is done in dental procedures for the eradication of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them where the extension is softened; and if any part of him is retained, then you should have the midwife apply her words with oil and insert those skillfully and turn around what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the expulsion of the fetus is delayed, the incisions should be changed to another location where the pus has formed; and do this until the entire fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is obstructed and cannot be reduced due to its position, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it until everything is expelled, cutting it either at the wrist or the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And the same should be done for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or there is compression in its presentation, or it is in a position where water cannot flow out, then insert between the sharp edges and cut off the head, or use an instrument called an "alundat," which resembles the shape of other instruments described in the relevant chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And seemingly, the making of this is of great difficulty by nature: and now you will see that it cuts into that limb bound with a splint, or takes up that swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is fixed and constricted, then the saw must be cut through the moisture that is in the foot.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not contradict the sight, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the hernia from the abdomen is inflamed or contains water, then you must pierce through that space where the moisture in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the problem is on their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction towards the opening of the hernia should also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and foot are squeezed, you must extract that thick cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the abdomen and foot until everything inside is removed.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are held still and the head is turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the mother's womb is closed, then insert the hand into the opening of the vagina, seek for the baby's head, and pull it towards you, then insert one finger, or two, and deliver the child.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is closed due to an apoplexy that occurs in the womb, then be careful not to cause further harm; instead, administer effusion of greasy humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; also, keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the problem is on their side, try to use a knife: and administer what we have said regarding the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the leg and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause within the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the treatment of the wounds that may occur from the procedure.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, stop it with strict waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and then another time, over that fire, she became pregnant again, and the other child was born dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It has happened that after a long time an abscess forms in their wound; then it opens as if fire breaks out, and they begin to shiver with cold.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called upon to treat it, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then consider the causes from various perspectives, applying strong treatments, and reduce it to a bone; after some days, another bone forms, and then another; and you will be greatly amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were bones from the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, you should follow the disease, extract many bones from it, and remove the female parts in their proper positions; for a long time now, it has been treated in this manner with a slight improvement.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be afraid that it is strange, for in this there is knowledge and aid to what the doctor with their hand applies for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the strangulator in which the limbs are entangled, with two spikes at the two ends of each foot.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spike should be made quite subtle compared to the strangulator, and it is made of bone or ebony or hardwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each wood should be such that two digits can fit between them, and the margin of both woods should be a single digit, and the length of each should be one palm and a half; in the middle position of the two woods, there are two notches already formed, of which the length is half a palm, and the width of each is two digits, or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the opening of the mother so that it be open to those whom you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wood or bone, according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, on the extremity of it, there are also two additions, each with a length of about a palm and a width of approximately two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the mother, you place the woman on her side with her feet hanging, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument resembling shears, according to the quantity you wish, from the opening of the mother until the meter indicates what you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vertigo that the ancients spoke of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that which is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as it contains the great cure:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is made like tongs with teeth at the end, also when you use them, and sometimes they are long, according to this form, also when you use them, which have teeth similar to a saw with which it cuts and contains.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The method of healing little by little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The method of digging without a spike:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The method of digging with two spikes:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps with teeth that close in which the head of the child is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A tool with two ends, where the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments, when more diverse are the species of them and better prepared the artisans, are easier to use and more effective for their purpose among people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second (object or part):
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is underway, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, if they exhale, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, take a hot compress and make a hole in the cover, then place it over the mouth of the mother, thus using warm and harsh herbs such as calament, rue, anet, and camomille, as well as aromatic ones like scicados (possibly *Syzigium aromaticum*), cassia lignosa, and stachys.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the hot compress, and then that one should be placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and keep it there until the steam enters the mother's cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one is expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment does not work and is not efficacious, then you command the matron to immerse her left hand in warm oil or an infusion of althae, and then insert that into the vagina and gently massage it, seeking the second one. Once found, grab it and slowly extract it, according to what we have recommended, so that the mother does not experience too much attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Now, it should be changed on the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and does not adhere.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with various herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to perform any operation on that part of the body in a state of abstraction, but note that what comes out from him into the mother's mouth lies in the woman's matter, and then anoint it with a mixture of herbs and tetracyclone; for this will rot it within a few days and dissolve it and drive it away.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you notice, it is a high fever that affects the head and stomach, and this causes the illness; therefore, consider administering fumes and remedies suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used fumes from natritor (a type of herb) and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to make a cut or an incision.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the wide end over the fire, and the smoking should be controlled over the branches of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that over which the smoke should be consumed, and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children have this problem, and their anuses are not perforated, but rather small and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to make a small incision as she has said, and if not, perforate it with a sharp instrument, taking care not to touch the laceration.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure to that cloth soaked in vinegar and oil; and carefully treat that affected area until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of obstruction, insert a catheter into the tract for several days, and stop it when the child's healing process is complete.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that there is an obstruction in the rectum due to a fistula or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, apply the cure as we have said regarding healing and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the cure for fistulas that have been left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that have formed in the area around the anus, which discharge pus and are swollen, either protruding outside or within the space of the opening.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or an abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and filled with moist white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate from it.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are guided by the liquid that is expressed from them for exit and expulsion; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exit, and very strongly, the liquid is expressed from those verm.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from those fistulas, some are found in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And for the case where the fistula penetrates into the anus and does not exit, you should insert a finger tightly into the anus, and attempt with subtle effort to erase or pierce the fistula when it is not in a state of tightness.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that place, insert a delicate probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the tension or hair in its proper location.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any tension at all and do not detect any cause for evacuation, such as a worm or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and you should proceed with caution in treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and the prohibition of its return until that location is healed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that tension has entered here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the circulation; and it will always cause aching; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it healed by ointments.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those is the work and diligence of skilled doctors over which they persevere.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But for those that are neither penetrating nor chronic, healing with iron is hoped for as per what I have told you, and what you have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the disease moves between your legs over its sides and raises the patient's legs within, the parts lean towards the patient's belly, and then it attempts to penetrate with lead, or iron if it is in a twisted fistula, into the place where you know the attempt succeeds.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert the pointed knife directly into the heart.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the pointed place the attempt already made, so that it has discovered how to penetrate, or if you feel something between the pointed place and that tissue or flesh, then you certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Yet some say that it heals certain men's tartar.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And regarding the treatment by which one hopes for healing in these cases, you apply subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that burning instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh surrounding the fistula, which is adjusted and resembles a quill of downy feathers, has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then, for those with wrapped up wounds, you should tend to them until all the flesh that is adjusted and compacted heals, and apply medicine that stimulates and strengthens the healing of the flesh; if it heals well, it is good; but if not, in no time will it heal through any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the attempt enters and does not penetrate into the deep tissue—the quality of which is either flesh or bone—and between that and the attempt, there is a space like a wound on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you should dry the attempt as well; then, when the drying of the fistula reaches the place where the end of the attempt penetrates, the attempt is removed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated meats that are assembled like a quill canal of use and not ruptured by any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when you inspect those meats, then the best course of action is to use a sharp instrument heated by fire or acute medicine; cauterization with fire adjusts the two habits well: it adapts those adherent meats and removes the pus by drying the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then attend to those wrapped in bandages or tied up within that location, and take care of the infection with hot wax applied to hard, infected flesh, generating and solidifying a cure.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines which include binding and cutting; when you have restored it, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already reached the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert a finger into the anus and inquire about that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you feel a sudden attempt and there is a significant difference between you and it, or it is inclined towards penetration, then at that moment, it is not an operation on it but rather a matter of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: either by cauterization as we have mentioned; or by drying out the affected area so that you can access it and offer the appropriate cure; and do not use excessive cutting, since it may damage the membrane containing the pus, and it is important to respect the patient's will; and take care of this as we have said, because it will be a strong treatment; or by elongating the membrane and draining the pus that has formed in the affected area, as we have mentioned before, either by probing or another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats that are created during the section, where you can use cauterization; and make every effort to restore the whole wound through sectioning, and if the orifice filled with pus does not heal, open up the fistula in the anus and let it drain more easily for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some times the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the thread into the fistula, it is done on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with a string and at the margin of the anus, take the pointed end to perforate, which is thus prepared as a needle according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert into that wound wrapped in cloth or around those; and then insert the thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates near the margin of the anus very deeply, then you extract the thread from that trap by inserting the tip into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and align both ends, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you insert the thread into the flesh again, insert it until those meats are inserted between the two ends of the thread and they fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then apply treatment until the wound is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not deep, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with force or gently, because it is not for you to cause injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is sharp on one side and blunt on the other, so as not to cause unnecessary injury when you cut.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they are between the anus and resemble stones, or those are swollen with the pus of maggots.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the heat flows from them at that time in one way, and they cause many problems, and they appear on the outside, and at the ends of the body.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outwardly on the buttocks are usually due to a lack of moisture in the past few days, from which citrus water or a small amount of sweet heat flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the buttocks is that you command the patient to lie down and press until the heat goes away and the bruises appear to your satisfaction.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you hold yourself steady with pins or whatever you have at hand, and cut open those parts according to their depth.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the cuts are not held in those parts by their moisture and softening, then take a rough cloth or a strip of linen, pull out those with your fingers, and incise them, and sprinkle some powder over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those places instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to expulsion, then you should treat the disease with a small incision, wash it with water that is in the abdominal cavity and which hinders the expulsion of the hernia more lightly when the hernia is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is lighter, and it is because you take those with your finger, or those with a balm, and cut them, and then attend to them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	For those who perform the incision, note how to apply stitches to them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around [a certain object], pierce it through with a needle, and extract the hemorrhoids from their attachment above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part; then wrap both ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid tightly with a strong pull, and tie off the thread, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this continuously, leaving them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from that part.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a warm compress on the affected area, coated in olive oil or wax; and press it upon the wound, commanding the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that compress and, when the wound is healed, treat it with ointment or other remedies until it is completely cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas may occur as a result of drying out or due to narrowing of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to those medicines, you will need to scrape away the dried matter using a point of sponge or your finger, ensuring that the wet discharge from them is removed, which prevents the formation of crusts; and then treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those at a distance with a sharp reason, as the first enters that which causes pain and becomes inflamed; then take care of those inside so they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernia is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a bulge in the body resembling a bone knob, present throughout the body but mostly in the joints of the legs and feet, and due to these pains, you should address it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then, you should incise what is in the area around the hernia, using scissors or a hook, and remove it from its place, and then tend to it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned previously in your chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small, rough, round ulcer raised above the surface of the skin, and spots are often seen on children's bodies.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is that you extend and incise it, or open it with a sharp object inside that cavity.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical instruments.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And these warts, both inside and out, can be eradicated with the instrument that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mosquito is a small, round, or grooved eminence on the skin's surface that itches like a bite from a mosquito and occurs anywhere on the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from an eagle's feather or a viper's tail, make it strong, and prick it onto the mosquito within its circle, holding it with the pressure of the needle; then turn your hand over the needle as you incise what is in the path of the mosquito, and press it into the flesh where the mosquito originated, eradicating the mosquito from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a tube of iron or bronze in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforated), wrapped around itself so that the appearance of it is smooth and its revolution is controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned above in the cauterization of a vein in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes heat is applied using silver or iron or bronze that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments depending on those to which it is administered, for the heat used in treating small children should be small, and for those whose bodies are stiff or painful, the heat should be gentle.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a great and rare crystal.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the tube of the hernia, in which the sac is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished where the sac is attached as well with several times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it is placed below, which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth (not covered) with leathery substance; and on one side of its length there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the size of the opening should be according to the thickness of the rays and more broad a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the sac in which the medicinal substances from the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, its size should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced through many openings as it is twisted; and the space between the openings should be as thick as said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert a strong, sharp instrument into those channels made of hard bone, or around them; adjust the bag to it; when the bag is paused on it, tighten it firmly between two distinct points at great cost, and cauterize each channel: The quality of cauterizing those is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too strong or too thin.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then place the patient on their stomach, elevating their legs and placing a pad beneath them, upon which already lie men or a lance; apply the tip of the cautery to oil or egg albumen or a paste of fenugreek or similar; insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it twice as forcefully as possible so that everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the cautery and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to be emptied, give as much as you can; and if you sleep with that for the entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you excise the growths in the solutions of the belly and the protrusion, then you apply the cautery until it heals.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus that burn and hurt, then use a subtle and gentle cautery, of which the childrens' doctors are experts.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**On the Cure for Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already mentioned in the discussion of curing plagues what suits a healthy body, and you gave the cure for those with great pain and according to the availability of medicines.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to what causes them and according to the place where the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which you become ill are due to plagues in this way with the weight of stone, or incision of space or of metal, or percussion with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or similar to those causes that bring about sudden illness.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The plagues that are in the parts of the body may also be like a plague that attacks the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the chest, and similar to those members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain plagues that it halts that reasoning and regulates the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the recollection of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it says that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the weight of stone or something similar, and you have already bitten off part of the teeth and it is a great plague, and you fear the patient will die from apoplexy, then immediately perform a craniotomy and extract the substance of the brain according to the quantity of the strength of it if there is no other cause preventing craniotomy, especially if the brain that has been affected by the plague is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And this is the first sentence translated: It is the flap operation contrary to the affected part; and attention must be paid to the patient's diet, and to avoid heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If there is any cause for concern about smallness (of the body or a part), then reduce intake of food and do not consume meat nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the infection, if it becomes gangrene, apply cauterization with hot oil or wine in which it is steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If it is certain that the cauterization is for gangrene, then focus on the infection; if it is recent, apply a poultice and ensure the air remains unchanged, keeping the recommended powder nearby.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that (unspecified condition), then focus on other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is severe or due to lack of space and similarity, and the lips of the wound are not properly aligned for healing, adjust them with stitches as I have previously described in the suture of their wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the plague has already exposed bone and pen, and it is not an enclosed ulcer but a small suspended one, then incise it and promptly treat the ulcer with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the area of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from food that is coarse: caps, forms, and similar items, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the ulcer that does not adhere to the bone, then incise and remove all of it, and properly treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plagues it is an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not severed by medicine, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should incise it with a knife, or tie it off; and if it becomes necessary to do anything contrary to what has been said above, then you should cauterize it until the pus is drained.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is slight; so that you sprinkle over them this powder, for it hardens in front of the air changing.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: take equal parts of olive oil and dragon's blood, and three parts of an untanned animal cauldron; mix all together finely and grind it, and fill the plague with it, and confine it tightly so that it adheres well to the affected area, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tightly bind it with poultices and leave it, and do not unbind it while it is in this condition so that the medicine does not escape until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Sometimes it is made only with this (powder) without the presence of olive oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now performs this surgical procedure on large abscesses when it is necessary to drain them and tighten their openings, and the abscesses are recent with clear pus, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has altered them, especially during summer, one cannot understand the position of this powder, so follow the treatment we have mentioned: place your hands over the affected areas with a paste made from chickpea flour and honey until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If the abscess ruptures in a bone, and it is small, then extract it with your fingers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And also describe the treatment for fractures of the skull, which are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the abdominal abscesses.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, nor between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the colon are cut or an artery is affected, then it is not a matter of skill but rather preventing treatment from causing intense spasms, so as to avoid substances like vitriol and similar ones that irritate the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not consider any cause of all this tension, for the substance of the nerves is tense and its continuity is towards the brain, which is the source of all the body's members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with lighter medicines, as when it is washed with warm water, sometimes with oil or without, and then dried with a cloth, and other means are applied afterward according to this method, and moisture is added.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is deep, then apply a stitch, or close the edges with bandages, and treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound is deep or develops pus, making it prone to infection, then perforate it in the most sensitive area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has already perforated an artery and blood flow results, then either separate, dry, tie, or cauterize it if that is what is required to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine of the neck or all of it has been severed, but the veins in the neck are saved, then you should close the edges of the wound with stitches above the jawline and do not touch that area; first equalize the wound and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it with moderate pressure, leave it for several days, and care for it with ointments where there is stiffness and inflammation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the disease has already taken hold within the bone, then pierce it, and if there are pieces of bone within it, extract as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for treatment inside until the infection clears and the swelling subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the disease has caused a fistula, then treat it with water from the source of which the memory will return appropriately in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the diseases of the collarbone or similar, when it strikes between the shoulders and is caused by a fracture or a cut or a stab or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a stab or cut wound and the depth of it can be seen, then consider more carefully if the disease has caused any swelling when the injury was inflicted; know that the disease may be fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the illness is recent, then you should apply powder to it from the first hour, but do not squeeze it so that the pain is not retained in its depth and does not return to the body and aggravate the disease, but rather apply a healing ointment and rub it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you do not have a suitable ointment, then apply clean, dry cloth to the affected area to draw out what it takes from moisture; and make the patient rest on the affected part so that whatever is in it flows properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If after three days the pain has subsided and the patient does not experience spasms or tremors of the heart, or constriction of the vessels, and other good signs appear, then you know that the illness is on the road to recovery; and then treat it with heat and cold as necessary until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the hernia is prolonged, and it remains open for a long time, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the infection is due to a wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it as mentioned above: with surgery if it is large, or with poultice if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the infection has already taken hold in the bone, and you have already incised the skin, then press the infection and extract the foreign bodies if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside as the infection may spread, and their extraction is hindered.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other infections that occur in the other members, the initial treatment is the same as what we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either great, or slight, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	When the condition is severe, one may observe the distension of the intestine or abdominal nerve, requiring careful insertion and a delicate suture.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And minor disruption is challenging to resolve in another way, and it should be noted that the reduction of them is more difficult if one does not quickly intervene by inserting them back into their place, as they open up and become swollen, making it difficult to maneuver them.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the intermediate disruption is best, as it involves neither great difficulty in reducing the hernia, nor is it challenging in both types mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for the sutures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures, though they communicate with other diseases, are more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it says that when the disease is small and there is no cause in the intestine for it, and it is difficult to return it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the narrowness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflated due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is thus, you must wrap it as if you were immersing a sponge or cloth in warm water, or take water with vinegar, and spices, and pack it around the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, it has been observed that vinegar is more effective than water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And once you have resolved the inflammation, you should moisten the hernia with water in which alder and marshmallow roots are steeped, for this helps to relieve its pressure due to a slight cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the hernia's protrusion is severe, then using this treatment alone may not be sufficient. In such cases, you should cut open the rupture with a small instrument used to incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the initial treatment is better when it does not involve cutting, and there should be no concern about drying it out excessively or depriving it of nutrition.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, pay attention to its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the acute pain, and in another part not acute, and the fine extremity, and let not the fineness of the sputum be overlooked, at first it is somewhat obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the hernia is enlarged and it has protruded, you must cover that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, as it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the rupture is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must elevate the head and feet higher than the affected parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must always direct your intention and consideration towards making the affected part higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in both great diseases and lesser ailments.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in smaller ailments, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, holding it with your hand and adjusting its lips, and gradually uncover from one point to another, seeking any cause for the rupture, other than the suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common suture method: take the needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the wound's amplitude; then lay it on the edge of the rupture at the little finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid putting any pressure on both ends of the thread, only on the two ends of the knot that remain inside, as long as you make the needle penetrate from the other side of the knot; and once you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the knot, you have made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tightly twist the thread double around the needle, sometimes from two sides at once, and add both lips and the wound for a proper addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and attach another needle to it, as if it were the first one; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you've filled all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses between coarse and fine, for the fine needles slice through the flesh more gently; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be both middle in size and delicate.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should be noted that the needle should be placed in both ends of the hernia gently, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the hernia opens up before its healing is complete.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures should not be too long, so that the hernia is not blocked from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so that they do not puncture the patient during their sleep; place pulvils on the sutures, spread out from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the illness is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of suture have needles in a way that is most convenient for small wounds, where one needle or two or around those are sufficient in the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	However, the second suture is initial: and it is that you administer a suture to all four extremities, from the tailbone and two extremities of the thigh, at once, with an needle in which both thread is tightly wrapped, in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to its original path from which you began, so that the thread retracts and pulls the wound closed, making the suture like a second drape with which the drapes are tightly drawn together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, hold the amount of the thicker end of the thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch prevents men from bleeding.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I have closed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, which was caused by a knife, and it was a rupture of a major infection about the size of a palm, and it was located around the intestines near the middle of the abdominal opening, and it was a rupture in the middle of the leg; and then I reduced the swelling that had been around the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed in about 15 days or so, and he was cured, and I visited him for many years, and it was discussed in his condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; but by a miracle, for you did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment and any medicine could not reach, yet you applied the treatment to the wound twice a day and repeatedly washed it with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two kinds of suture according to the account of the word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin to suture from the back, and insert the needle from outside towards inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle penetrates the skin and reaches the underlying tissues according to the rule and length of the body, leave the tip of the instrument in which you have inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the first penetration, make another penetration from that same side of the wound towards the inside; leave the tip of the instrument in this place, and make the needle penetrate from the other end of the wound towards the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration by which you cause penetration into the body at the end of the eye, which is in the opening of the body so that all of that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then commence with these treatments on the side and with that extremity which is of the body in the other direction, remove the needle from the thread by which it penetrates, and return it to that thread and to the extremity of the body which is on this side of that extreme of the eye; and remove from the thread that is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this once and then another time, and do it again close to the first time that you have done it according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this manner of stitching is that you stitch with a skin suture by which you sew the flesh, in such a way that you stitch the body once from the part of the extremity of the needle, and then you repeat it again until the wound is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of suture, which is especially called Guilda, and this is of speech concerning it and by it recommended, is that you sew according to the second half-way through which some doctors sew it, thus adding all parts to its natural part appropriate to it; and apply one end of it to another end of it, and the other end of the gaze to the other extreme of it, and this is done as you have learned.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take the needle in the end of the gaze towards your own part outside, and make it penetrate into the part inside at that sole, and leave both ends of the cloth; then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from inside to out through both ends of the cloth.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn back those threads, and make some of the parts inside penetrate into the outside part in two ends of the gaze other than those on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And in this manner of stitching, it is better than common light stitching, it is the kind of stitching of which one has previously had recollection.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some might say that the stitching of the belly is done with two needles, so you must insert a thread into each, and begin to introduce the needle from this one, penetrating it into the other side according to the stitching of those which join the flesh together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is when you realize the recent pain in front of its sore spot that the air has altered it, and reduce the hernia and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that fleshly powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the pain, then place your hand on that alcus (flesh) in front of you so that it causes hard pressure and extracts the filths, and becomes solidified and healed; and treat it thus as with other pains until it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have any medicines at hand, then apply pressure on it immediately, as it begins to feel hot, and bind it with a cloth, changing the dressing twice a day, just as your teacher has shown, until it is healed, for you should not need other types of medicine due to your careful disposition when dealing with simple ailments.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you are afraid that the pain might spread to other main parts of the body, then cover it with a piece of cloth dipped in pure oil or fragrant oil and place it on the areas lying between the folds and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their bowels, as these symptoms are observed, it is necessary to apply a warm black stinging vesicant, especially if the inflammation has spread to the intestine and a discharge is seen penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one affecting the large intestine has a lighter healing process than that affecting the subtle bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive healing from any plague that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins present in it, and the magnitude of these, and the subtlety of the body of that part, and its nearness to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to stop it recently, reduce them according to your method, so that the intestines are generally reduced.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If the wound has been left open and turned red or black, then tighten that thread over the affected area to promote blood flow, for within the fabric are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut through what is another of those ligaments, and secure both ends of the thread during the removal of the hernia's sac, so that by doing so you can relieve the attraction of it and the emission of the hernia's arm.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the hernias that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it is possible for some individuals to have it restored, for you may find that which was previously plagued in their stomach by the thrust of a lance, and it was an old hernia with a fistula, and they managed its management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the treatment of the patient, even if it was not cured by the previous remedies, continue with subtle treatments that ignite healing and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And having observed the place now consolidated, pay attention to the illness that has befallen him due to an accident in his belly; do not force anything for this ill-fated accident and do not break his healthy dispositions in eating and drinking, and then immerse yourself in a bath and exercise according to his condition.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones say that when a hernia in the belly is small, it should be treated as follows: take some large needles; then adjust both edges of the hernia and place one needle from those that keep the mouth open on both edges of the hernia; so when they are pricked onto these, tighten your mouth, cut off the head of it, for it sticks and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle near the first, but do not stop doing this until you have used enough needles for all parts of the hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return it [the hernia] to its place and heal the inflammation; and cut off those attached parts within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia appears as a fine thread taken from the intestines of an animal, thinner than a needle; so take the end of these intestinal threads, desiccation them, and then attach the end of the thread to the hernia with a needle, pass the thread through, and return the hernia to its place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with threads is merely a second way of trusting and hoping.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the hernia is large and wide, especially in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not just a matter of restriction but requires subtle treatment, for it is not entirely healed.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of sores and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every sore and abscess that forms as a result of aging and becoming antiquated, and it becomes an ulcer that is not solidified and persists for a long time without being incised, is generally called a fistula in any part of the body, and we call that 'zuchem'.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, in truth, is a hardened, white structure without pain, in which a cavity forms as if from suffering; and because of this, it is called 'alcus' (ulcer), that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In ulcers, moisture forms which can cause pain; and the humidity is expelled in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this humidity is abundant, sometimes it is scarce, and sometimes it is thick or thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already previously mentioned in the division, when you described the ulcers, that every wound which does not heal or is not on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: among which one is either a lack of blood flow in the body; or maliciousness from within; or because between it and the skin there is hard, prohibitive tissue preventing the natural regeneration of flesh; or it is of excessive weight; or because that ulcer itself becomes pus and the material that enters it is of bad quality; or the medicine is inappropriate for its cure; or corruption has spread in the region, and it is a plague; or due to the nature of the region, as is the case in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and healing from apoplexy takes a long time by natural means; or because there is a bone or many bones involved.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of those, as well as their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus, it is necessary that you know the cure for a fistula that is caused through surgical means with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skull, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints formed by the connection of the hand and foot; and those give rise to proximity to the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas, those according to this manner are of the most difficult to heal diseases, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these mentioned places, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take care or a knife, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, examine that place with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that place with a delicate probe, because the weight of their body lifted and curved must overcome the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not possible for you to treat it with attempts.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, sanitize the orifices for their filth, because the moisture by which you cleanse those orifices should also clean others and remove their filth.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And now, examine carefully, according to which way it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula with only horrible odor, over which all your strength, all your questioning, by which you question the illness, and the discovery of the pain depend on your compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs of the meanings and accidental causes to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with due care, you will see the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is a fistula nearby or in a clean place, far from joints, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which you know and hold dear.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now, let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectetut (prescription), then you must incise it in the pronus (supine) position as much as possible, and then clean it of all corrupted flesh; and then administer some wraps with sharp medicaments, and insert them into the concave part of the fistula, which you have comprehended with your hand.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this in such a way that the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the concave part of the fistula caused by corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that with fire, which generates healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed with this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then examine it and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not forbid any cause of vein or nerve or of a major limb, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption or blackening in it, clean that part completely where the corruption resides; and tend to the flesh around it until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the bone does not heal and pus flows out as it did before, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; so uncover it again and carefully perform the treatment and purification of it with the strongest local application, and thus restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	So if it heals, then it is good; but if not, you will know that the corruption is in the deep and distant parts of the body, which could not be reached, and therefore your effort in that place is only to clean it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small and it is possible for you to remove it, then use subtle forceps suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are many bones, extract them carefully from all of those, and leave none due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of inflammation arises from moisture, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then incise those wounds or flesh if they are here, and loosen the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to extract the bones from your patient, then place your hand on the plague where the plague is most severe, and leave it there until it becomes more flexible, allowing the section that you have incised in your operation to be closed without restricting it.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Meanwhile, if you are afraid, apply hot oil or Egyptian alum or any of the green ointments to that part, for when these bands relax, the bones will separate more easily, and this attraction will be relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg bone or similar, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then at once that pain should be treated only behind that darkness and corruption remain, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted from the bone is a great fracture, and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound completely by cutting into the area where the corruption has taken place, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you overcome the patient in their thigh to hold that in place and assist with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the swelling originates from within the body, concerning the material inside the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of abscess or great abscess, not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time extends until the infection is severe due to the errors of doctors, as the abscess becomes enlarged, and it will be surrounded by hot, moving materials, and its treatment will be paused until the leg is fistulated, and various horrible wounds are made in it that cause pain and humidity in the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so many different treatments from doctors surround the patient for about two years, and they focus not on the cause but on the symptoms, until they are called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he observed the leg and the materials that were flowing from it through those horrible wounds, covering a large area; and the body of that man was entirely stiffened, and his colour was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so he inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone with it.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And he then examined all the wounds and discovered the cause of their pain from every part of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut through one of these openings and discovered a portion of the bone, which was deformed, hardened, and deteriorated; it had already been corrupted by a part of the leg that had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I secured what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I then realized that it was not the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already weakened it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I stopped the restoration of the disease with consolidating medicines for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I then re-examined and discovered the bone a second time according to the first discovery, and I found continuing corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will address what appears to me as that corruption, then return you will make incisions precisely to effect the cure and restoration, but if it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you will discover over it another time and do not cease to incise the small bone particularly and perforate the restoration of it, but it is not restored until you make an incision around a palm of it, and extract that with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation or section of it except for the disposition of the frail condition of it and due to the lack of tolerance of it and the danger of death, as it experiences weakness throughout all hours due to excessive evacuation leading to fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; it is good to arrange it in its body and return its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and does not cause opposition in walking or damage on any account.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If a bone sticks out in the body, when it is necessary to remove it, you should act as follows: take some lubricant and tighten that around the end of that protruding bone, and ask someone to spread it; then tie the thicker thread over the flesh left on the bone, and extend its tip so that you can pull the flesh away from the parts below, and expose the flesh in the area you want to cut, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or table under the bone appropriately, for when you do this, the saw should not cut into sound flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be sure to make the cut in the diseased part of the bone slowly, because if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear on the surface when touched, you may need to repeat the cutting process.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, but rather a continuous split with another, and the corruption is in the middle or at any point along it, then expose the flesh from all sides; and place sticks underneath, and cut the first split where the corruption has entered, until the sawing continues through the other split.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues to another part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in a straight line but must be treated ingeniously.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, open that up, and treat it according to any disposition possible for you, and correct the deformity ingeniously, when it does not cause pain to the veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels are suitable for cutting these bones, as they depend very much on the position of the bones, the preparation of those, their thickness, thinness, size, rarity, hardness, and other qualities; so it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for this operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation signifies to you regarding the type of instrument of which you are in need; since you have great study and long experience of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, for when you have already encountered them by yourself, then you know what is appropriate for them among instruments for all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your training, thus fulfilling your duty according to experience you will gain on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of treatment:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this treatment should be in the shape of a clave (a tool with a cross-shaped head), and the points of it are shaped like the points on a star.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to apply this treatment unless the joints' heads are corrupted or the mouth is excessively wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the larger scalpel compared to others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the smaller scalpel:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of the broad scalpel:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved less and its edge sharp like steel, and the patient's limb cut gently with a descending knife.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The form of the razor with a concave shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The form of another razor, more subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The form of another razor with an extremely curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The form of a small razor resembling a hook:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of the chisel-like incisor that cuts through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The form of another smaller chisel:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another chisel; this one resembling a ray, with a serrated end, and commonly used in various places for cutting bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the ray that is suitable for reasoning about those who are pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular with a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and in a way that covers all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of the extremity and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or if you have treated that corruption with certain medicines and the cure does not follow, or if the corruption is so severe that it affects a member that you do not wish to harm, then you must cut into that member within which the malady resides, in order that the disease may be relieved from causing death or great damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it has been cut, as if fire had consumed it, or you may find the blackness spreading until it affects another part of the body which is still healthy and takes over the entire body; so consider this carefully when making an incision on that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources such as a scorpion's sting, or a viper's bite, or a similar one.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the tip of the finger, you make an incision on the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, you make an incision at the root of the finger and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the entire arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you change your mind, then incise the arm inside the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and the joint is affected again, then it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for its cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, for the foot when corruption occurs, you incise it inside one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter inside the toe, then you incise the leg inside the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then it is not possible to heal it, but only its release, and you leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the site; and the instrument extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and the minister extends another ligament upon them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without a wide space until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it should be covered with clean cloth from all parts to prevent contact with the site, and bring the injured patient to a calm and safe condition.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the site carefully, or apply some powders to stop the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the afflicted member with a suitable ligament, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to take a man in his foot, this injury that you and I have recommended, which occurred due to the dark color on his foot resembling the burn of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurred first in his inner leg, which tends to spread throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And so that man prepared himself for this treatment, knowing that the cure would go to the member with the intensity of his pain and the heat of his condition, and he incised that foot at the joint, and fire healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that injury caused this corruption in the leg indicated by the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it subsided, and I felt compelled to reflect on this phenomenon, which led me to consider the impact of these remedies on the body; and the excess did not recur, and I began to focus on the other leg, as I had started with the one in my hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor tries to cut into the patient's hand, and he does not want to do this fearing the repercussions of that superfluity, rather he must insist on the incision of the patient's dead hand, for the virtue of the disease was in its decline.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he had left me, he returned to his land and compelled me to prepare and cut off the hand of that man, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this narrative is not presented merely to describe this illness but to provide assistance regarding what causes it and to explain its meaning, in order that it may be understood and treated accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of fevers and the quality of enema medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, then it breaks and perforates itself, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the area hollowed out as if by a vessel, and the skin above it remains intact, without any posterior corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments. It is called a fever, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption entirely encompasses a member, it is then called a fistula and not incised.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that entire cord as it is revolved, especially when it is subtile and made with a needle, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption does not occur again due to its last consequence, and the cord has passed through the wall, then treat it with a cleanser.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and honey, received in equal parts, and placed in a vessel, then heated over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches its best quality.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash out the affected sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the body, and leave the medicine on him for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that foreign body; do this for as many days as it takes to cleanse the sinus and heal the wound.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, enema with ash water can be used when this medicine is not available; you take ash from the fireplace, mix it with water, and then use that to wash out the sinus until you feel that it has been completely cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash out the sinus with a mixture of honey and water, and add three parts of triacet to it; also, wash out with a mixture of wine and honey, for honey purifies and cleanses, and wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which causes the flesh to be born in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyes and dissolve that oily crust and apply it as a styptic; or cleanse that part with some medicine mixed with ointments which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the cavity are narrow in which the catheter of the cleister cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge them with a small iron, and place on it hot water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifice appears to be wide enough, then close it with stitches and leave it for as long as the cleister is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice of the patient from which the arm emerges is elevated above its usual position, then dry that part in the lower location within them so that the arm runs inside, for when the arm is restricted in the depth of their chest, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the chest within the environment of the lower, infected bone, then perforate so as to prepare the member for the arm to move slightly from them according to what you have prepared and that nothing prevents the arm from moving.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently placed over the chest accordingly to what you wish to extend, applying them over a cloth of them.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity as to cover all the chest; then, with scissors, cut in the right side of the orifice of the chest a tract slightly wider than the orifice itself; and extend over another cloth of them some warm compresses according to the size of the tract, and place it over that at a distance from the orifice of the chest so that the movement of the arm is not hindered by the large cloth for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is over the wound of the sinus, which constantly oozes at all times, in order that it may draw out what is adhering to it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has accumulated over the wound of the sinus has become adhered, or a strong adhesion, then on the third day you loosen it, and when you free the infection, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If it is a sinus that has gradually created a very narrow space, do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it, because healing in such places is its own, for some people suffer from slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others from the opposite effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if an indigest bridle has been removed from the sinew for several days, you will know that the sinew does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinew is prolonged, adjust in the drought of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and their virtue, dry them as with a drying agent, when there is an excess of moisture from the addition of protection.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last method by which it is treated, is to take a drying agent and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it over the affected area, just as you would use any other medicine.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in the same way when there is no bridle, take a drying agent, honey, as if it were thicker, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe, crush them, and sprinkle them over honey while it is on the fire, and wrap that up in cloth and press it onto the sinew; and do the same with the honey which you have observed to be thickened, sprinkle it onto cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And in some cases, they administer to him long extracts and roots of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and erring grain and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, triturate them and sieve them and sprinkle the powder over honey which you have gathered; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the pain persists and does not improve with this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the sinew of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with fistular treatment, as it is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of pansies (varicose veins) and sore nails, adding cuts to the digit, and making incisions.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici (varicose veins) is an ulcer that leaves the nail of the finger or toe weak, and it strengthens in other parts, and as it continues without treatment, it becomes a more severe ulcer, either cauterized or corrupt, and it bleeds so much that it corroded the root of the nail, and severely corrupts it entirely, and reaches its corruption to the bones inside that emit an unpleasant odor, and it affects the extremity of the finger, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have treated that as we have said in the previous section and do not find relief, then you must incise with a sharp instrument all the superfluity that is gathered in the joint and apply a cautery to the wound nearby, for cauterization brings relief in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the joint healthy, but the additional fluid in the joint already compresses the flesh inside, and you begin to pierce and hurt it, then stop and make a slight cut at the angle of the joint that you are piercing through the flesh, and push it apart and slice that flesh easily, and apply over it the medications with corrosive-burning oils until all the fluid from the flesh is drained; and then care for it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	However, if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing where the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corrosion and corruption are found in the said part, you incise it into one of the joints according to its recall, and then cure it so that it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is necessity for percussion or incision of the finger, and the pain is severe, then you begin by carefully cutting into the flesh at the base of the nail with a sharp spatula or secator in a transverse direction, and be sure that the cut does not penetrate the surrounding flesh that remains under the nail, for this will cause severe pain to the patient and lead to the formation of excess callous tissue at the site; then treat that area with something that relieves the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But rather, consider this condition that is natural in the bodies of many men; some have flesh that is very tender, others have bones that are very hard, or their nails are very hard.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is a condition that exists in some of the joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born into certain knowledge does not suffer from this, and he who is born with strong joints is more prone to it.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshly, the incision is shallow, and you must insert the blade into its root with a gentle touch.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	He who is born with the root of the joint should be careful, for its cure is difficult; therefore, beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born with such knowledge, be careful to begin the incision at the flesh's edge near the bone using a sharp, suitable saw, and then carefully tend to it until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that occurs between the joints due to various circumstances such as frequent use or a person's inherent nature, or due to hernias or burns or similar conditions, should therefore be carefully removed until the joints return to their natural state.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets soaked in warm oil so that the joints do not become stiff immediately, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if it seems that the consolidation occurs in some specific part, like the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In the knowledge of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins, when they become varicose, are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, particularly in those who walk, work, or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	So, it is clear that you should administer a purge to the body from black choler at times with a strong expulsion, and then draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of their pain is according to two methods: one is to incise and drain that black pus, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: at the beginning, the leg is pierced with a sharp instrument until the thick pus is resolved, which is foul from the leg, and then the leg of the patient is tightly held at the dominant part of the pus within the space between the thighs using a bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and the black pus is raised with the doctor's hand from the space beneath the leg until all the quantity that is desired and sufficient to cure the patient is extracted.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then close it up, and order the patient to abstain from hot foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And the cure is repeated through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	At this point of the treatment, the elevation of the patient should be done as follows: if you unbind the leg of the patient and find it covered in hair, wash it immediately and immerse the limb in water heated by a flame until it becomes numb and the veins are relaxed; or if the patient has been engaged in intense exercise, without the possibility of washing, then the affected member should be rubbed with cold water.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then, using a knife, cut the cord at the right of the vein, either along its entire length or near the end, or, if it is very low, cut it off close to the base.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then, using scissors, cut the cord and carefully extract the vein from its entire length until it becomes sensitive, and you must assess the patient's condition as the disease declines towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus, after you have extracted and removed the cord, you should observe that white is the remaining vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert your fingers into the space that should be elevated and moved away from the spine, and suspend them with a light touch to avoid any pain.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another incision approximately three fingers away from the first, and carefully extract the spine from its attachment to the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section behind the toe, and extract that one, raising it until it passes through the second incision, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section of all the incisions, ensuring that all are passed through, and then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-ended needle and tie it, and extract it, or insert the finger into the space and turn your hand over until it is completely released.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to incise; for if it is cut, it will be difficult to lift that part and it will cause further harm to the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once everything has been removed, place your attention on the affected area, immersing it in vinegar and applying both scented and unscented oils, and treat until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting, and it does not follow the straightness we have mentioned, then you should cut across all parts of its twist and at the sites of its involvement, and then suspend it until you raise the whole of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to incise the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult to lift it, and use your caution in this regard.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of an ulcer:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as sharp with ulcers nor does it have an acute extremity so that it does not affect the vein; moreover, it has great flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein because of its thinness; we have said this regarding its superfluous thickness.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in the groin area in Arabic lands and in the rear and arid parts of India with little moisture and no grass or open spaces.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very few are generated in other parts of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of decomposition is such that it emits a foul odor as serpents, worms, and maggots emerge from within the wound and breed between the wound and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending arrival of gout is this: a sudden inflammation in the leg, then the affected area becomes swollen; and soon the vein begins to withdraw from that inflamed spot, resembling a plant being uprooted.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the onset of gout is apparent, you will see that you must wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Within this lead, place the affected limb and leave the lead suspended from the bedpost.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as you encounter any cause for gout external to the body, wrap it in lead and note this.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists for a prolonged period, you should insert a sharp object into the affected area and wrap it; do not insert it all the way until it's out, because if you do, it will contract and penetrate into the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, and bad ulcers in that spot.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated further and gradually extracted, until it is completely removed from the patient's body and no cause remains in their body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some people have reported that it extends to the length of their palm and fingers, and I myself have also seen it extend to a length of 20 fingers.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during treatment, then insert the ray into the tract of the hernia and perforate that long tract through the body, so that everything inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has been observed to have many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes great pain, and it arises from every painful branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and pay attention to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section regarding worms generated beneath the skin, and it is called bovine affliction.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This affliction is called bovine affliction in many lands, for it causes great pain in the body; a small worm is born between the flesh and the bone, and it spreads throughout the entire body, pushing and breaking the bones until the worm comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms, serpents, roundworms, and hookworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared by the evil of these worms, for when they enter the body and rise to the head, they affect the brain, violently shaking it within and destroying it, which should be observed.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure and extract it, you do not do it unless you first understand its movement and appearance, and then grasp what is above it and what remains beneath it, tightly, and after that dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery to the place where it resides until it moves, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of the hernia which damages the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you try to cure that which is closest to the head, then tighten over the forehead with firm pressure, and dry it, and extract that; and take care that the disease uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and be wary of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the section regarding the treatment of pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nephritis in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a woman's house in a village, and you discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation on the vein at the wrist, which you punctured for an hour, and as you pulled out the needle, you saw that swelling go away, almost like it was alive as it moved from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then all at once the pain in that place disappeared and you felt it in the muscle, and so you left this pressure for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then you repeated the same process on the other side, until you reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I began to examine the whole body, as I had seen him, and was amazed by the transformation of it and the speed with which the parts were changing.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had previously seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many others who are tormented by pain as they are changed from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen this in the feet like this in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is otherwise but that it is for this reason that the woman was crippled, with her weak body and exposed veins, and in this condition, the sensation of that changed wind is felt.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward treatment does not appear in those who have healthy and moist bodies with veins covered.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to treat him and the patient feels that pain, it will not be as we have said, then tighten on that part and leave it slightly and dry over that until the airiness is stopped, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not know the causes of these pains in your feet, then cure that which relieves the body and removes airiness, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of snake venom and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, or dull, being solid; some have three angles, others have tongues, and others are notched.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it is classified in two ways: for the principal members, including the brain, heart, liver, lungs, rheums, hernias, bladder, and similar ones; and therefore when it catches in any of these members and appears as your signs of death, which I have previously described, you must understand that you should avoid extraction of this arrow from those parts where death is that one in which the greatest dispositions are present, and when these malaises do not appear on you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract that one and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant is when an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone, and it arises from the base of the skull, which is above the brain, due to the violent heat, and scotomies, vertigo, pain in the heels, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, loss of speech, vomiting of bile, strong loss of words, and destruction of voice, and it leaves the afflicted area with white humidity resembling powder, and blisters like the consistency of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, the signs of an arrow embedded in the heart, where it is close to the left breast, and you feel a sudden sharp pain, not visible cause; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to pulse and the flow of black pus, and there is a chill in the extremities, and fainting, then know that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung, showing pus-filled plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are filled with blood, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily, and requests a strong draft of air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow catches in the membrane in the foot, and the pain is felt near the small ribs, it causes great pain with strong sobs, and all the muscles of the limbs are not relaxed.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if an arrow pierces the stomach, immediately you will feel strong pain from the poisonous food causing indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes stuck in it, causing a wound from the poison or a tear in the organ wall, there is no hope for its cure unless the arrow is extracted.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and it leaks urine outside, causing pain to the patient from some internal cause, and strong pain is felt, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Similarly, the other parts like the face, neck, back, shoulders, elbows, legs, and their corresponding joints in the body can be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you about what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that it may be meaningful for you in regard to their cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	Which cause is this, for in a man there is an arrow in the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and you remove that from him on another occasion, leaving the grays of his eyelid intact, and he recovers, with no harm to his eye's socket.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had become lodged in his eyelid, leaving the upper eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden, so it could not be removed except for a small tip that clung to its fur, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion's hide without leaving an imprint.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew, being sensible, did not suffer any further harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the gullet, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one with the sharp point; then I incised it between two guides, and it was already immersed in the patient's gullet; then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his stomach, and I thought he would die from it; so, after having passed 30 days without any change for the better regarding his condition, I incised upon the arrow and removed it, and thus healed him, causing no further harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been embedded in his back, and the wound was severe, so after setting a fire nearby, I carefully extracted the arrow at the base of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had an arrow embedded in her stomach, and the wound was severe within, but it did not change regarding its condition, and the woman did not suffer severely from any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man whose face is pierced by an arrow, the wound is deep and the arrow is broken, causing little pain but many similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who had been wounded in the middle part of his nose and had already turned slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called upon for the treatment of him, so that within three days the arrow's wound would heal.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; and then he inquired about it gently, and did not feel it, but he felt a slight prickling behind his right ear, and then he hoped that this prickling was caused by the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Then he applied a poultice to the place with an astringent and digestive effect, confident that by doing so, he would draw out the arrow from that place, allowing it to heal over time.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be concerned about the location of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply the poultice over it for several days and no adverse events should occur; as the wound heals, break up the swelling from the extraction of the arrow every few days until on one day you feel the arrow within its base and I will attend to it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should apply acute corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently try to extract it, and cut off the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I will devote my time to it for periods of time over four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has become inflamed and I can insert scissors into it, I will persevere as much as possible without causing pain, but if I do not succeed in subtilizing and ingeniously removing it with these methods, then one day, through these ingenious ways of removal, I will extract it using forceps designed for descent, according to the form of those mentioned at the end of this chapter; and I will restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, and the disease became solidified, and the illness was cured entirely, without any further complications.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that it provides rules and meanings regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those from this text are not understood from narration nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans compare a little about words; and regarding what is present, about what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments for understanding the descent of foreign causes within the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore you say that arrows are not forced out of the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction towards the place where they enter; or conversely, from the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is a sharp arrow proceeding in the flesh, and is thrown out and withdrawn.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when cats should be fed, then know that you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it improves and the attraction of the cat and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it becomes lodged in the bones and you do not adhere to feeding times, leave it for a few days until the attraction and motion are reduced each day, and it is eventually discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to feeding times for a few days, then know that you must pierce the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle point where the location is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has pierced one of the brains' ventricles, and it manifests in the patient some of those symptoms which you know and call, abstain from removing the arrow and leave it there until its presence is no longer felt for a few days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only passes through its skin and does not enter the brain, and the patient recovers after some days without any of those symptoms occurring, then you must devise a means to attract the arrow and draw it out.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your efforts to remove it, then you must administer treatments along the arrow's path as we have recommended, and tend to the site until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the body and resides in a specific location, and if it affects a certain sensation, then you should question the patient, and if you sense that, then use various stimulants to aid its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the arrowhead, here there are no bones or nerves or veins, then make an incision on the plague until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached to it, which is often the case, then carefully cut away the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the means at your disposal; and devise a way to release the flesh in the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until you achieve complete healing.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location, use a twist of your hand and forceps from all sides until it is completely freed; and with great care and subtlety, ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it can be easily extracted along with the affected part.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot access it at the time, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the affected area subsides, and then repeat the procedure when it is eased.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience difficulty with bleeding, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every way possible to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and calmness and delay and firmness as you would for yourself and as recommended by others.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you must aim the point of the arrow into it, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your ability, then administer what is within your abilities according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are shot against the opposite side, or which already process any opening in the outer parts, or make the end of the arrow swell due to the pressure from above the designated cord, then focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and shoot it, for it is made light for departure.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then cut with a knife according to the direction of the arrow inserted into the bone, and amplify the cut, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not help after several days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the point of the arrow is embedded in it, then push it towards the body.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the point has fallen and you want to give an impulse, then insert a sharp object and, if it is dull, sharpen it by fitting it into the concave part of the bone where the arrowhead was, and then push it towards the body.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the stimulus, as the arrowhead will be diverted by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is deeply embedded, you must press your concave hand into all the flesh where it is situated, as much as you can, and tend to that part as best you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel it through the skin, and if it is possible for you to remove it without causing injury to a vein or nerve, then remove it and treat the wound as necessary, and bandage it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Design of forceps for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, which is equipped with serrated edges to grip the arrow firmly, preventing its release.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various shapes and sizes, large and small, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness, its fragility, the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the affected area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	A method to apply pressure on this concave extremity with the hand in such a way that it alleviates the pain and removes the arrow's head inside it, and pushes out that lump.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method for applying pressure to a painful extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that it removes the arrow's head from the concave wound and pushes out the lump.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venipuncture
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of fleubotomy, of which there are six principal ones, are: two pulsatile veins near the auricles, called the maxillary veins; two veins in each temporal region, known as the superficial temporal veins; two veins on either side of the nose, termed the lacrimal veins; a vein located at the middle point of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the back of the neck; and two veins on the lower lip. These are referred to as the 'glandular' veins, and lastly, there are two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are; for one is a cephalic, and it must be the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and deaf, and it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilic, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that the people "the vein of all the body", and the basilic is the vein that is stopped in the domestic latz, and is named "citellar", and they call those vulgar "the stomach vein"; and the brachial, and it is stopped over the fossa, and it is that in which flebotomy is performed, and that which appears on the arm by manifest appearance; and the temporal, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, and only in it are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the end of the wild latz; the second is superficial, and its place is left by the camba of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and its place is left by the camba of the wild latz; and on the camba are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is for ancient catarrh, emigration, and ulcers of the head, old malaises.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And as for the quality of bleeding, it depends on what you have observed: it should be near the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occipital region at the place where both veins are located close to the auricles; then, tightly wrap the patient's head with a bandage that exposes the two locations where the auricles appear; and try this as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those parts as they say, do so.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now, take the cutting scalpel, and it is one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the flail botomy reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then, raise your hand over the vein and neck, and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide or around that; and make the cut as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, apply strong compresses and leave it until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it is already mentioned at the beginning of this text the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But regarding the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the primary cause of flu syndrome, ancient and severe, recurrent and persistent eye problems, and acute excesses in the body, are the main factors.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing a fleubotomy is as follows: restrict the patient's movement so that the two veins appear in sensation by manifest perception and it is demonstrated that their pulse has stopped; and then you should proceed carefully.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then, raise the cord over the vein as indicated above, insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument here, and elevate the vein; cut it likewise in the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to your need's quantity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, carefully tighten the patient's tourniquet, place the indicated pressure on the vein for an hour, and apply compresses and heat to that part until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And having previously recalled them, and made the incision, draw them in at the commencement of the opening.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy depends on what you recommend; it is that the disease tightens its hold with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the phlegetor, which has this shape.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the bleeding at the point where it is on top of a vein and press onto it with your finger or some other tool in the appropriate manner, and allow the blood to flow according to the amount you desire; then close the wound from the incision made by the surgeon until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, the artery is opened by a lateralis flebotomy, but it is not understood that this flebotomy should be of acute severity as with the other flebotomies, but rather from a lateral extremity, and the flebotomy is made transversely, because the bone there is strong and would break easily if a subtile flebotomy were performed.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the two veins that are the tear ducts of both eyes for the discharge of tears from the eyes due to irritation and sebaceous in the eyes, as well as eye diseases on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the flebotomy is that it tightens the cloth on its own, then make flebotomies on them, and you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the fluotomy is performed according to the transverse direction along a slight incision, for in that place there is little flesh; and if the fluotomy is delicate, then the extremity of it is easily broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then allow the fever to run as much as necessary, rest on those parts, tighten them for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The fluotomy of the nasal vein is effective for acute fever and violent pain, and for facial maladies, migraines, and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this fluotomy is that it tightens the patient's collar and then places the nose with the left hand, taking a delicate, long incision at the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and because the fever begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure you complete the procedure of fluebotomy slowly with your hand, allowing blood to flow according to need; then close it up again the next day, as it will be slightly healed.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	After the healing of the flebotomy on both sides, constriction of veins and commencement of leprosy and other malicious diseases and corroding ulcers should also be considered, as well as the use of potent remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the disease tightens them all in their place with adhesion; and the expert should be over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make small incisions on the vein with a wide flebotomy, and extract blood according to season or as much as is necessary for treatment; then do the same for the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then carefully loosen the ligament and tighten the two veins with a gentle pressure to prevent the illness from spreading, and leave it within the bandage until the pain is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the young people who suffer from phlebitis of the veins, it causes small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, inflammation of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers on the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the phlebitis treatment for these individuals is to stop the illness in its track, tighten the affected area with a bandage, and then carefully retract the lips to expose two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each vein is identified by its darker color due to the presence of smaller veins beneath, and you make an incision with a sharp knife at the point of greatest prominence.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt on your part, and you do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision on the larger of them, and examine the pus that comes forth from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And it appears as if there are two veins on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is often necessary to cut both veins that are on the patient's lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	When both veins that are on the tongue cannot be treated, it is appropriate to perform a phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its origins, which are in the throat, to the malady of the uvula, and to mouth maladies.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these is that it follows the disease among your fingers in front of the sun, raises the tongue, and looks below the tongue, from one side of the vein to the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And so perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to finish your hand with phlebotomy on those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the groin are those through which blood usually flows in all men; the flebotomy of them is done in two ways, either by using a flebotomy syringe or olive oil with subtle declination; or cutting with a flebotomy knife, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for section, and they are special knives and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle flebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both the width of it with times, and it needs to open the concave veins full of thick blood, and to those that contain large clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this type of flebotomy is performed on the smallest and most delicate extremities, suitable for flebotomy of subtle veins containing subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the extraction of blood from the basil vein, one of three veins, removes the venom from ailments remaining in the gullet and colon, and also from the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be very careful and cautious in that area, as leaving an artery there, if he mistakes or misplaces the puncture of the flebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is important not to perform flebotomy on that part with a sharp instrument, but rather with a less invasive method.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basil vein does not appear by clear observation, then you must leave that and change to another, or seek some branch of it; or perform flebotomy at the end of the arm, as that one is manifest; and perform flebotomy on it with a less sharp instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform an artery ligation, then cover in front of the constriction of the arm that you touch the place within recognizing the location of the pulse, and then place a seal over it tightly; then bring close the arm and cut the vein with a concave section for an arteriotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid the percussion through any space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you observe, with strength the ligament, inflation in the place that you have sealed tightly, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you observe the blood flow in an arteriotomy as with a ear of a child, and the blood is thin and clear, then know that it is from the artery's blood; and then cut and press on the wound over a long space; and close the wound, and if the blood clotting occurs, as you see the clots forming, tighten the arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient from their excretion, and be overly careful of them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the gangrenous part does not separate, and it is not suitable for any medicine, then you will have to incise the artery if it appears necessary; for the end of it is contracted and the gangrenous part separated; or take some fistic, make a hole in it, and insert half of it at the place of the vein's constriction with bandages and poultices for the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the gangrenous part is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned, in memory of the place of the absorbed powders' flow of gangrene.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of gangrene from them is difficult due to the small size of the affected area and the possibility of binding in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is quickly done to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be cautious in phlebotomy for those who have excessive fear of phlebotomy, because there is a nerve; and then, when you reach the point of phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and it will be difficult for him to heal, and many times he will not be completely cured. This nerve causes movement in sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, you must know that you pause the phlebotomy with which you cut off the vein and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The immediate effect of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief for illnesses in the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want the flebotomist to puncture the vein with an olive or myrtle flebotomy, it is because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to know that in flebotomy, you should not puncture the head of the vein too deeply, seek the most delicate spot, and do not notice it, if it is not troubled by the initial percussion that is done before the flebotomy on some occasions.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, it may be strongly painful in certain people when not punctured in the first percussion, but do not pay attention to that pain again regarding the apothesis.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the flebotomy and its complications are the things you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translates to: "The first [point] is that you must know that phlebotomy should only be performed in the interest of health and with the hope of preventing illness, and it is done on one of the veins located in the groin: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; it is performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and during winter, when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if performed immediately, within three hours of rising.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be performed when it is convenient and necessary, at any time of day or night, during any hour or any period.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it should be noted that phlebotomy should not be performed on children under 13 years of age, women who are pregnant should not undergo phlebotomy until the fourth month, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be freed from some condition by any means, it is necessary that he purify his bowels in advance with a lion's enema, if there is a significant fissure therein, so that the veins do not expel the excess fluid during the fleubotomy of the bowels, which are clean, and they do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let the patient not be subjected to fleubotomy unless he has been purified by sacred rites and fasting, nor should he escape from illness or madness until this is remedied in him, nor from hydroptic diseases; it is better for a colic, vomit, abdominal pain, multiplication of urination, defecation, work, exercise during meals or vigils, or any cause that depletes strength, whether physical or animal, to be treated by other means.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is necessary to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard, if the swelling is due to heavy food, drink, or medicine, if it is possible for him to avoid these things.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse in a bath if any cause does not prohibit or if some exercise is performed to alleviate the pain.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that foot, which is to be watched on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is too much work and unnecessary effort and pain similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his bedside, have the causes be present of the which corruption usually occurs in men, aromatizing and perfuming them, and applying balms and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist over another cushion that is pus, rather than the cushion of the one who was to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the flebotomator two or three times; and afterward tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the stricture should be tempered, for when the stricture is unequal, or it is superfluous, then forbid the flow of the sanies; or if it is for softening, then forbid the movement of the sanies altogether.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And afterward, applying the stricture, ensure that whoever has been subjected to flebotomy rub their hands together repeatedly between each other until the veins are inflated and visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the flebotomist should apply a small amount of anti-inflammatory oil to their flebotomy site; then, using their left hand, they press upon the vein, slightly indenting it, leaving the area where the flebotomy will occur, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is relieved. This is because when the veins are inflamed, they should be contracted after the flebotomy, and if they remain open, they must be tightly bound to prevent further bleeding.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, because it appears that the fleubotomist (bloodletter) should be stopped and diligent in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, after making the fleubotomi (bloodletting), if the vein is swollen at once, it is good; but if not, repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or applying compression over it, if the location is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is abscessed or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament; for severe abscess will quickly become worse, nor should it be bathed.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the fleubotomi if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the pain subsides subtly, and you fear that it does not open enough to achieve the desired amount of bloodletting, then repeat the fleubotomi in that place according to correctness and adjust the opening a little, and apply compression before the location becomes abscessed, for in many cases a small opening is sufficient.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may sometimes be an already inflamed spot, and it does not matter where it is located, as it provides no specific cause for concern; apply some oil to that particular part of the wound, as it soothes the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the oil-soaked pad is used in every flebotomy where veins must be freed from body heat restrictions; it acts as a tire and an aid to wisdom when pressure is applied from one of those on the site, as the heat is dissipated and circulation is improved when it becomes hot.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a significant abscess is formed at the site of the flebotomy, due to various incidents, especially when it is not bleeding but rather that spot becomes inflamed, or in the perception of a thin vein, then you apply, and press on the place with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then cover this with the bandage of that vein, completing it with the aid of another vein or some other method.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or green discoloration appears, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that place a mixture of aloe, myrrh, or any other similar substance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often accidents occur, requiring the removal of abscesses and prominences through flebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel any tenderness, you should apply pressure to that area; for this prominence is a sign of evil and ill health, and thus be cautious not to place your hand over any cause of what we have said, as strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area of tightness, so that the location is held firm, and take care of the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the sanium from each person in accordance with the amount of its virtue and according to the dominant color appearing over the sanium as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanium is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and similarly if you have a thick discharge, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, then preserve its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of one who is full and strong and requires extraction of sanium all at once: enlarge the flebotomy of the vein and make the flebotomies broad.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is anemic, do the opposite; and when extracting sanium in several instances, make the flebotomy narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best for administering flebotomy of a vein is that it should be transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where syncope occurs after phlebotomy, it is customary to treat that immediately with a small amount of wine infused with mint or simply diluted oxymel; and extract the blood from the wound in three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a complication from the phlebotomy, then take before the phlebotomy a pa (a small amount) of infusion in myrrh or honey-based infusion seasoned with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or an aromatic and strongly smelling infusion.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is due to the sudden loss of a great deal of blood, then take in a beverage made from meat water and slightly fragrant herb infusion; use fennel seeds for their aromatic properties, and apply liniment to their feet at that area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes as mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the ganglion a second time, as with the one from which flebotomy is performed for maximum evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the small ganglion little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	He who extends his arm and dissolves his ganglion a second time, and whose body is strong, should do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	He who throws the ganglion of the body in the opposite direction of the decline to which it is inclined, should do this on the second or third day after it has extended.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	As for the body in which there is much ganglion and it is acute, causing fever, it should be evacuated all at once from the ganglion, with a great quantity being discharged, and the perception of pain should be amplified within so that fainting occurs; because you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the body of the ganglion so as not to allow it to cause death in place of fainting, since repeated attempts are necessary when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to free the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the orifice of the vein is already closed and it becomes difficult to extract the blood, press down on it with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too painful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habitize the lay person in a position where they can perform flebotomy secondarily; or maintain this with the acuity of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place your hand on the area of tyriac alfarach, or of sagacity, and compress lightly until the blood has completely exited.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, lay it aside and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed them at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fistula or basilica, when they are not found or are obstructed, as it is composed of those parts.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the physician inserts his hand into the patient's arm until the wound becomes inflamed and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and phlebotomize according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be an ample opening, and your phlebotomy should be such that you phlebotomize over the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the passage of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sansevieria is most immersed in cold water at certain times.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is more safe than all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vena cava on the right side is indicated for liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you should tighten your hand strongly on it, as you have placed it in cold water, while the vein is inflated and clearly visible to the eye; then make a transverse incision on it; and if you pierce it from top to bottom, it will not reap any harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to cut off your hand during phlebotomy, as this will leave the nerves of these parts exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand on the vein with oil and salt, so it does not close tightly; and pay attention that you do everything correctly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of the arteriotomy of that hand with the left one is appropriate for the illnesses of the chest.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same for the arteriotomy of it as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the healing of the vena saphena in the arteriotomy is for illnesses that are on the outskirts of the body, as with illnesses of the mother, and to prevent menstruation, and for illnesses of the joints and ulcers of things old and new, and similar to the illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the nature of the flebotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction until the veins appear; then it is tied over the joint of the foot with a strap; and the place where the vein is to be cut appears, from which it branches out in various directions on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, after the vein is cut, open it widely with a knife and place the patient on their side near the ankle, which is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a flebotomy on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are left underneath the surface of the foot, and place your hand over it when performing the flebotomy, taking care not to cut through them.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And the flebotomy should be powerful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to raise the leg, then immerse the foot in water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, repeat the flebotomy in that place a little more, since the spot is open; and do not fear the patient's ill will, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems to do the same thing on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is beneath the knee at the hollow of the femur's attachment to the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the wound of the flebotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is done with a hot cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flebotomy on him is that the patient enters a bath, and immediately and strongly squeezes the flesh of his thigh from the outside to his ankle with a thin, long bandage, so that only that appears.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, you perform an incision on that part according to each method at your disposal and the direction, which is best; or cut through it with a scalpel or sever it with secation, since the location of it is exposed.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is also not uncommon in many people; and if you find it, and it does not appear to be painful at all, perform a small incision on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot opposite the big toe and the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as desired.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then tighten the bandage around the area of the incision slightly and press it firmly, as gently pressing will promote healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Vents are from corns, or scabs, or blisters.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is performed according to two methods: one involves the incision and extraction of pus, and the other is ventilation through incision alone.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation, which is through incision, is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are performed through incision and extraction of pus are in 12 places on the body, of which one is where ventilations are paused, and it is the last opening at the top of the head; another opening in the middle of both parts of the neck; ventilations under the jaw after passing through the mouth; two openings on the cheeks; ventilations on the shoulder blade; two openings below the armpit; ventilations through two needles; and ventilations through two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of wind should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, do not catch the virtue through them, as it is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered with fire or heat in any illness caused by congestion until the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to provoke wind for an illness or continuously, we should permit it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle part of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in men, wind (or humor) accumulates to the point of grave discomfort and stiffness; it finds congestion and heat in their face and head, and in their eyes, causing darkness and weakness in their legs; it causes them to lose the place where they have made an opening for the wind; and as a result, their laughter increases; they experience a pleasant taste of wind in their mouth, or their tongue becomes stuck and spits out wind; their sleep increases, and during sleep, they experience heat, pains, and other similar ailments.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when pain appears in any part due to those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the night, they order a ventilation to be made after two or three hours have passed from the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate ventilation of the neck consists in when that condition imparts gravity to the head and causes it to sink into the shoulders; more importantly, this is a proper evacuation for all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the location of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is of cold and wet composition, or in which catarrh exists, as this causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, one should not use those on the feet, and on the tops of which are incurable injuries.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is lying on his back feel relief; and for that reason, make sure the bellows operator places his hand lightly on the suction parts, so as not to cause loss of consciousness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The use of bellows (ventozacio) can replace phlebotomy of the vein and basilica: thus it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the larynx, incision of the windpipe, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to gently apply the bellows to the lungs a little, for if it is stopped suddenly, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the bellows application to the head (alhagdahan) confers relief from accidental pains in the head and eye, migraines, and facial pain, and is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And beware that you command the bellows handler not to press his hand during scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the bellows should be applied to the mouth to relieve congestion of the gums, and to similar conditions in the mouth, and is used instead of phlebotomy with a knife that is done on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the bellows applied to both palms brings warmth, which is done by means of repletion with heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the bellows applied within the armpits brings freshness after phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, the femoral, and the cephalic, as it draws blood from all those manual veins within the flesh, and from those smaller veins of the other, larger veins until it attains the three mentioned veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And order the bellows to not force further the scarification, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows that is blown over openings and conferres aid to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to command the bellows that it be a powerful bellows, and of iron, for the place requires a strong section; and its sharp, thin blows should be applied gently during the scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The gentle blows of the leg bellows, by their minute manifestation, draw the sanium from all parts of the body, and provide relief from ancient pains in the kidneys and bladder, and from fever; they provoke menstruation, and provide relief from pain in the loins and sides; and they serve in place of phlebotomy for two veins, and also for scourging and binding.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Nevertheless, these weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings of the throat, the healing is also directed to the openings of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning of the flow, allowing suction to occur in a timely manner, and does not prolong the position of the openings; rather, it releases them slightly, and retains those firmly, and allows the humors to come to the area by their own occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until the area becomes red and swollen, and the pain of the inflammation appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender skin, be careful to cut him once, and not again, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to increase the cutting and press slightly, and facilitate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein is great, you must cut twice, for the first cut opens the way for drainage of the vein and its contents.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very foul-smelling, you must make a third scarification so that you can achieve the last (result/effect).
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we wish to extract the vein little by little or a small one, it is enough for us to make a single scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a hard stone, make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we should make an incision sufficiently deep.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarificacio" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is very large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places for the suction cups should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed oil of hazelnut, or oil of nettle root; and if it is in winter, use butter, or oil of lilac, or chamomile, or stone root, similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is very thick, sticky, then use oil of marjoram, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, it should be prohibited from oil, and at these places where the leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with warm water or with water mixed with salt, or with hot water from a bathtub, or similar.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose leech has a lot of humidity, washes its leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are abundant, wash their leeches in ancient wine or in water mixed with fennel, which is marjoram, or from the infusion of anise, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before a bath; as it is recommended to administer the leech just after or during the bath for an hour or two, and that the patient should sleep with the leech in place.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the bloodletting after phlebotomy before bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the process, if the phlebotomist or the one who has undergone bloodletting is irritable and has severe pain, inflammation, then you should take measures to counteract the cold, such as with milky herbs, endive, vinegar, salt water, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And their diet should be restricted to light foods such as chicken and other lean meats, seasoned foods, and similar items.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in plenty of warm drinks such as almond milk or poppy seed milk, sumac, and fragrant herbs between meals; and it is recommended that they consume little to no alcohol, avoid chicken, duck, and small birds, and limit their diet to herbs.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on days of vomiting and bleeding, the patient should take more liquid than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is also necessary to give drinks containing tyriac, or a mixture of musk, which is peppered, or alcelite before vomiting or bleeding, or afterwards, so that the main parts of the body are comforted and the pain is alleviated; and they should not take anything causing a rash.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, all the openings (scarifications) that are made should be on areas of the body that do not suffer from cirrhosis or gout, such as the liver, the perineum (area between anus and genitals), and the armpits, except for the joints, which should not be subjected to scarification.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desirable for these (openings) to drain the pain from a member, but rather to stop it with a pause over the breast in cases of severe blood flow from nasal sinuses; and they use this so that the trapped air in the member is dissolved, just as they pause over the stomach and navel, because it refines the member and opens it up, relieving pain as it resolves the trapped air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is now held in place over the bruises when they occur by pressure or impact, because due to the power of attraction the bruise has a healthy pressure and eradicates the clot from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to happen when it is held over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only, and occasionally using fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of hot water for the ailments of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation is filled and a great pus is produced, it is only hot water or water in which appropriate herbs are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a wound dressing applied over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of material should be the thickness of a palm; and in the length, on the side where it is in the round, half of it, the edge should be small according to the amount that fits into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use erysim or citrus, with thick margins, lion's paws, nails and thorns to prevent the member from changing its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place across it a transverse blade of iron or erysim where the candle is held over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this dressing is much greater than that which we have previously used, and its quantity is less according to the illness and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suckers on children's bodies are weaker than the suckers on young people and those with strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this pain with fire on the member is to extend the flame from a decent piece of firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse tongue at the exact spot of the pain, so that the fire is ignited around the area to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And once it is stopped over the patient's member, as we have said, when we have the pains and do not require what has been mentioned, and the heat causes the vapour to rise over that place, then the pain will be quickly dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And ignite the fire according to its manner, and repeat it if required by that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	A ventose may be applied to the pleurisy patient without a transverse tongue or a place to insert, and it should only be filled with water and stopped over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this windbag, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	**Chapter LXXVII**
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting instruments are not applied to all parts of the body, but only to those where it is impossible to use cupping glasses, due to their small size, as well as in places like the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments, which are in the infected wounds of animals.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is well to lay them in water, both day and night, until they become numb, without causing any cause of pain in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and rub the patient's members until they turn red; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and bound.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the area with a vent, it is more beneficial in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, wash the area with vinegar and then apply warm water; and both should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the swelling of the wound persists and it drains, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water, and place it over the wound to stop the drainage.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound becomes enlarged, sprinkle over it vitriol mixed with salt and similar things according to the causes of stopping bleeding, as long as the wound is drained; or place on the area the dried seeds of poppy and leave them until the seeds adhere to the wound, and the swelling goes down.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it is necessary, apply bloodletting, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is forbidden, then the place should be rubbed with a warm compress or a needle should be inserted into the same place until it bleeds; and once they are stopped, because those who feel pain will soon give in.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some Aloes trisate, or salt, or ash on that place and it will soon fall off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment for the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mentioned frequently in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time did not study the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it happens that this manner of science in our land is neglected; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have devoted myself to this only after a long study of the books of the Ancients and an understanding of their minds, so that I might extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have dedicated myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that relates to my science and on which I have gained experience; so that others may benefit from it and be spared the labor of expansion; I have summarized it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it in the final part of declaration; and I have formed in it outlines of the tools that are administered there, as an addition to explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The summary and compilation of fractures of bones, especially those whose prior mention is necessary, before we begin the recollection and recall of fractured limbs and their differences.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us set forth in the preamble of this chapter the sums of the discourse; and the chapters to those who understand them, at the beginning, the artisans are compelled and at ease regarding the truth of these; it is for you and for those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from no one other than yourselves.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture, dislocation, twist, or misalignment, you must immediately consider whether to begin with a fleubotomy or to separate it, or in some other way, if no other cause prohibits, with the utmost urgency and virtue, or it is the one who suffers, or weak from decrepitude, or exposed to violent heat, or to intense friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then it is proper to content oneself with one's own food of bitter herbs and flesh of fowls and crabs; and you must abstain from thick meats and any foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as you are certain of avoiding apostema caut, and if you have no fear of material effusion in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original position, to which they are accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the broken bone begins to be restored, you should know that the hernia should be deprived of nourishing foods with rich and heavy nutrition, also making meals from wheat cooked in water, and rice, and eggs, and meat, and cow entrails, and goat, and fresh fish, and large vegetables similar to these, and according to this regimen, there is a gradual and lighter coagulation of the fracture.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones are brittle in old men and those who are weak, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature due to the lack of blood flow to their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continue according to their nature as long as there is no blood flow to those members, and they only continue and consolidate in the end of the illness, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause resembling gout, in which there is an accumulation that adheres and strengthens that part, until it becomes solid and firm, just as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prevents it from performing its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, foods that have weight and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fractures varies according to the diversity of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now let us recall all kinds of fractures, expounded in their separate chapters.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures exists in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified in their kinds; for some fractures are bow-shaped or occur elsewhere; and sometimes they are according to the length of the bone - such as stage fractures, sternum fractures, and additional ones arising or not from trauma, as is the case with fracture due to a blow to the head, small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every kind has its own specific pain or torment in restoration according to the distinct remembrance of itself in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A clear sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how it is known to be a broken bone: its twist and turn, and the prominence and sensation of it upon touch, only when you press upon it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no obvious twist or turn in the location and touching the bone does not cause any agitation or pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a twist or a small fracture, where you do not realize it with your hand and when compressing it does not hurt; then apply over it the remedies of which you have memory suitable to the moment, and make it tight for a thin constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the location when it is curved and does not break into two or other parts without any accident in it, as the entire part of its comparison is restored, then you must begin from your hour to correct it with caution after it has happened.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it develops into gangrene, leave it for a few days until the gangrene disappears; then treat it in any way that seems most effective and suitable.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of the intestines and the stitching of them is lighter work than the treatment of bones where an injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen it as much as possible when the memory of the pain comes back.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is broken in two places, it may be necessary to extend this member from both ends, if it is a hand or a foot; or with one's hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position the member to which it was originally attached in its natural shape, while holding the broken parts of the member extended; then pierce so as to cause those additions to return to their places, using whatever means you can think of.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be mindful, according to your strength, not to harm the patient with your operation or cause any injury; and perforate as best you can, applying one instrument to another in accordance with their most effective forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And take care that at this opportune moment you apply your hand with the strength of yours, and if you sense any different cause here, correct it and overcome it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression; thus do foolish doctors often cause gangrene through their operation, or bring about contraction in the member as we have seen with this in the operations of their misguided attempts.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, establish equilibrium and perform a proper operation with stricture on that member, and provide rest and tranquility; warn the patient over this and ensure that it does not hurt him in the hours of his vigils and sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and attend to its management, and pay attention to all its movements with all your strength; and wait until the position of the member is such that it is assured from pain or injury, which is why when you feel pain or discomfort due to the position of the member, you change it to another position where it does not feel any pain; and be mindful that the position of it is straight and equal, so that no deformity occurs in the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members can be diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and elbow and similar to those, you should know that the wrapping should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thick like the skin or leg, you should know that they require a tight and durable wrapping, as the binding on each side connects the large member and tightens it from every direction, so that nothing enters inside.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, carefully remove your evacuation of the swelling, apply appropriate pressure to it, over the place of that fracture with three or four layers according to the member's needs; and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then apply it to the beginning of the fracture site, pressing strongly so that you do not tighten your constriction which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gradually lengthen your wrap around the fracture site, gently loosening the constriction little by little, until you take away from the site a great deal.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and cover that other side over the twisted site with the wrap, and remove the wraps from the beginning beyond the fracture; and it is your operation on the constriction of the wrap and its mollification according to what we have said about the first wrap above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the wrapping bands a lion's wool or cloth to which is attached the twist of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; otherwise, do not place anything on it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand over the other part, and wrap these sterile bandages nicely around it, as long as there is no swelling or abscess at the site, and press upon what has the abscess and alleviates the swelling; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of various types, wisely chosen; they can be made of cane, or wood, or palm fronds, and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, remember that the bandage placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the limb in terms of size and compactness; then tighten the bandages over the other part as per your initial structure; wrap them closely around it as we have said about tightness, and this should be according to your structure, specifically for the fracture's location, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less tight it needs to be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are of suitable thickness and fineness, and are many; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in the operation of some stiff sheets, slowing their thread cords, it is a great error when the tightness becomes uniformity.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Moreover, very fine threads are not suitable because you cannot achieve the desired tightness with them, and you will not be able to fit more than one finger between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the hernia is located at the joints of the bones, then tighten them in those places without using sharp objects or iron threads, as long as it does not cause harm to the patient.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the pain is so severe that it breaks the bones and causes disruptions in the joints, leading to a return of symptoms as described in the second chapter, according to their specific nature.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately tied with splints; the cause is that when a member is large, it cannot be held by splints right away, but after a few days, or seven or ten, according to your certainty of avoiding gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splints that the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of splinting as an emergency restoration for fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat or friction should not be applied: take flour dust, which is the essence of flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that is not possible, then take a thin piece of wood and form it to fit the shape; do not make it too thick or too thin, and use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of applying plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations: prepare a mixture of assafetida, labdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe in equal parts; or mix it with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's wound is not severe; and apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and proves beneficial to many.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster for fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alder, dragon's blood, mirra, aloe, acacia, and Armenian wool in appropriate proportions.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients should be ground in a mortar, mixed with water or egg albumen and administered accordingly.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of plastering and separating joints and bones from their locations, causing accidental pain in those areas and to cracks and fractures: take fine lint and immerse it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not meant for restoration, but to prevent pus and expel pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering for restoring closed bones: take dried fig leaves and poppy leaves, mix them together, and make a paste from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method for a quick plaster used for bone fractures and to aid in the healing of abscesses: take alder branches, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, all-purpose flour, mix them together with wine; crush them until they form a paste, but not too finely, unless the member is scraped.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that to the affected area with cold water from parsley or cold water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way to apply a strong poultice for resolution after the first, when there is a hard abscess, is to prepare from fennel seeds and dill seeds, and hyssop, and melilot, and marjoram, and violet flowers, and chamomile flowers, and any other herb in equal parts; all are crushed and mixed with savory water or rosewater or vinegar, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on the affected member before its restoration unless certain preparations of wax and oil are made, and not otherwise; and he recommends that it be applied with a mixture of coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A Gaul may be seen applying poultices to the member that has been broken before its restoration, and the causes for which it is dry, seeking heat in such things as myrrh, onions, and similar herbs, just as we have recommended for those causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a poultice for injury and pain: take equal parts of chamomile, nettle leaves from a man's beard or goose feathers, and salt, mix them well, crush and sift them, and make a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the sprain and its separation; if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, it is not necessary to completely dislocate it from its place; in that case, do not force it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if a severe pain, pressure or swelling occurs at the site, immediately release or remove the poultice and avoid applying any further treatment to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and a sponge from the sea, moisten them in hot water, apply this to the area until the pressure and pain cease, then let the member rest for an hour; then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, wrap it up and leave it for the night, ensuring there is no further infection and that the swelling of the member subsides and the pain disappears.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that thin restriction and a small plaster without straining it with your initial tightness, and gently use it on the inside until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, pain, swelling, and all the other symptoms have already subsided, and you find yourself in need of a plaster and restrictions again, then apply that same method as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause occurs to the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove the plaster for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes it is left for twenty days, as you judge by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that spot.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the restrictions more than in your initial tightening, and adjust the diet of the patient according to the progress of their recovery.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried out and weakened, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that area; so you should apply a poultice of hot water to it every time you treat it; and this for three days; and slightly relieve the tightness, and with this operation, direct the nutrition to the member, and heal it gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But here is what the foolish restorers of a member's fracture do another time when it is not restored from the beginning, according to its covering, and is restored according to its crookedness, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a right surgeon, he would open up these ancient spaces in them and heal towards this.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is much more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter on: Fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and their causes are distinct, for some fracture is caused by the impact of a blow, which stops all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone thus, as it were, torn from its place, and this type is called dislocation; or the space cuts through a part of the bone, cutting the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the rear of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the affliction of these two fractures is either great or slight, and from fracture caused by compression or strain; and its cause is a blow with a powerful object or an unexpected impact upon the bone, and they resemble each other in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, causing the pancreas to be pushed towards the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the affliction of these two fractures is either great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And from fracture, it is meant that it is endangered in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair small, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone and resembles, as it causes some lamina of the bone to break apart inside, and it occurs in the concave location, just as it happens with the ribs when they are struck and their entry into the cavities breaks.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is most commonly caused in the bones of children, as well as adults.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And with all these types of fractures, the bones are separated as if they were stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then you must return to the original state of all that is in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have come to know all these types of fractures by examining them and trying their strength and the evident corruption of flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known for being discovered when one looks at the bone, and it is cleaned, and pressure is applied over it, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents that arise from the illness, and if you examine these accidents for what they signify by their manifest signs, such as vomiting from cholera, extent, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge of pus, and redness of those areas, and similar symptoms in the major dispositions, it is a sign that one is not healthy.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If one examines non-corrosive accidents, one hopes for health, then one begins the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the pain has come upon you at the onset as it does and this happens during the winter days, then you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to your disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you must know that you should study the bone in front of the 7th day, after which what remains of the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and accidents as we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then you must know that you should incise the divided and inflamed part as you have learned.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you remove the patient's pain-afflicted head, and discover the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the shape of the pain, and it should be lighter on the afflicted.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you should chance upon the detection of a bone fracture, pus or abscess cauterize it carefully, hold it with what covers it, and apply cold compresses soaked in wine and olive oil; allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumcision of the bone and the removal of the abscess.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you cut the bone with a narrow scalpel, and this is its form: Then administer another scalpel to it, a little wider than the first one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer the broader scalpel more deeply than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you must use various scalpels, some broader than others; and some of them shorter, with the latter being more sharp at their ends, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their aid to facilitate percussion over the incision so as not to hurt the head and injure that part.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, be careful that you perforate in the circle of the hernia before administering the incision tools, which are called non-deep incisions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this way, but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone in the testis to which it is attached; so that at the edge or margin of the incision there is a rounded tip or curve over that which leaves the head of the hernia exposed, resembling a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, each suited to the specific nature of each bone, as long as they are present in all parts of the brain; the end of which is sharp, the amount in length and brevity should be according to the quantity of specificity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three types of treatments: When perforating the channel of a broken bone, place the treatment over the bone and rotate it within your hands until you know that the bone is penetrated; then move the treatment to another location and pause where it intersects all or part of the thickness of the ray or surrounds it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with scissors what is between each part of the bone, making it thin enough to be able to place over it in a lifting motion, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool that you use to press upon it, using pliers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure that you take great care so that the scissors do not touch any cause of injury to the patient.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have perforated the bone and it is separated from the injury if it continues at it, and you extract it, be sure to clean and smooth it on the roughness of the bone from what is in the bone, like scissors, but nevertheless be sure that it is more gentle and subtler than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you pull out any part of the small or thin bones, take a tool suitable for this from your instruments, and apply it to cure the wound with lint and bandage it as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which cuts through bone and flesh for great praise; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have uncovered that part and paused, leaving the extreme end of this cutting tool slow and gentle, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is wide and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts advancing lengthwise, thus; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike with the instrument on a cut of a part with a small mallet until you have cut through the bone completely, so that it is easy to remove, and you are sure of the panniculus that it does not occur in it an accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicant14 (presumably a type of salve or medicine) was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their conditions; certainly, he would be asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a bone breaks due to a cause attached to the tissue in certain parts of the bone, he will cut it from that part with a curved scalpel and release it from its encumbrance, for it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate the tissue, and what is detached or remains attached to the bone is the fascia, containing roughness and subtle filaments, you will need to shave off that roughness and eliminate those filaments with delicate razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them as appropriate in all areas for the most convenient and accurate use of these according to how you conduct your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must apply in your reasoning, with which you shave the bone at the beginning, the most sharp of these razors, and then use them sparingly, not ceasing until you have administered the most precise and delicate application to all these parts.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Place a small capillary and subtle fracture in each of the other broken parts, ensuring you administer treatment according to what you find during rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all who have studied that art follow it perfectly.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us dwell on what he writes, having shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicle is retracted when you remove the bone, then take cloth from it according to the quantity of the ulcer, submerge that in warm oil and place it over the ulcer; then take another piece of cloth or one folded twice and immerse that in wine and oil, placing it over the first cloth, gently pressing it over the ulcer so as not to damage the flesh; and then apply a thin layer of lint, not tightening it unless the ulcer is large.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the abscess being healed; then remove that and administer medicines as necessary to reduce dryness, such as linseed oil and flour of elm, and powder from herbs and aristology, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to the patient all medicines of the right kind from which they should abstain and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your ability that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not allow any pus or other impurities; nor should you add virulence to it; for when it is attached to the tissue of the brain, it corrupts and harms it, and brings about a malign evil upon the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the brain, when because of it the bone is corrupted and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if this accedes to the patient the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is pernicious for all its skills.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if a blackness does not occur from the medicine placed upon it, but rather from that very medicine which causes the blackness, then take some honey and finely ground olive oil in equal parts, mix them with a cloth, and apply that to the affected area; and then treat it with the healing spices appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	**Chapter III**
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two places at once, but rather one of those bones or perhaps some of them, since it has two bones within it; for the broken part is cartilaginous and not actually snapped, and it does not harm it with cracking and distortion and inflammation.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert a small piece within it and hold that fracture together from inside with a thin stick, and apply pressure from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done to facilitate your work and beware not to cause pain during your operation on the patient's illness.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach that point, then it should be equal to the end of the line where there is a slight bulge.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make it similar to this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And open the fracture for its restoration on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, return to the seventh or tenth day to observe the healing of the wound.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or insert two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and make sure the cloth fills the nasal cavity to its fullest extent.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And so some of the ancient remedies are that the swelling should be immersed in a bath, and changed throughout the day, which I have not seen; after having discovered that the joint is immersed in an albumen of chicken cooked with flour powder; and then apply it until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes it is found that it is inserted into the nose instead of swelling, due to the high amount of pus that is wrapped in a cloth from lions; and this is because the fracture of the nose is very painful and the injury does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this treatment is not always necessary; and if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use swelling.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another incident occurs of nasal abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or a strip soaked in hot oil and rosin, or with vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not accidentally cause an abscess, then cover that external wound with a paste made from sea-nettle flour and powdered enssence mixed with egg albumen, and place your hand over it for some time, without allowing the nose to touch it for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you break or crack the bones of the nose or they are displaced, then carefully divide them and extract any pieces that do not belong there; and with the cut, cure it by packing it with what is appropriate to promote healing and solidify it, and apply suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you suffer from an infection inside the nose, then cure it with hot compresses and insert platinum tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and not split into two and bent inward, then its healing will be light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right index finger; push gently to facilitate the separation of the fractured parts inward, with your other hand from the outside of the bone's broken side, until they are equally aligned.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both parts, according to their rectitude, so that they can be aligned as much as possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if tooth concusion leads to displacement, then tighten those of which you expect to break free using gold or silver or silk thread; place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and lay a large, properly cut sterile dressing on top, or a piece of single thread along the length of the mandible; then secure it as appropriate according to your equipment and what application is convenient, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And order the patient to rest and be quiet, and abstain from eating any rich foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has been altered in any way, then on the third day, you should cut and loosen the bandage; correct what has been distorted by it and apply a powder made from millet, or egg white, or chamois flour, since you will have removed the cerate from it, and place over the plaster a woolen cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And having thus attached and adjusted this plaster over him, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless it becomes loose, until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for usually this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another case of gangrene occurs, then as we have said regarding the treatment of this disease in the previous instance, apply it until it heals, and renew that treatment for the abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of the bone or fragments, then carefully apply pressure to those fragments in a way that suits the removal of those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound of the fracture is narrow, then widen it through flailotomy according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have secured those fragments, and they no longer move, then widen the wound of the fracture if it is narrow; otherwise, place a splint over that one of the appropriate tools and encase it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula (a bone in the neck) when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the ribs are seen to be broken, the fracture is caused in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, separated, or divided into two parts other than accidentally, it is less prone to restoration; or it happens that the bones adhere, making restoration difficult; or the fracture is as if it were a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is as if it were a plague, you must have two assistants present, so that one holds the adjutor and continues to hold the broken ribs, while the other stretches out the collarbone towards that parted area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then bind the fracture with ties as it is done according to its form, and not in a few prominences or convexities.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, wait until the cushion of the patient is covered with cloth or wool, and adjust its size according to your necessity; then extend and raise the splint and tighten it with your hand until you feel the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the splint to the desired position due to its curvature, then you must reposition the patient so that their chest is elevated, and place a cushion over their muscles, one-and-a-half times larger than needed.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant should then press on the muscle at the joints, while lifting the splint's end towards the fracture, ensuring that the bone is correctly aligned; then, you will adjust the fracture and secure it in place as needed.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any resistance from the splint or it is difficult to move, then you must cut into it and extract that interference to facilitate its movement.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, you will make an incision with one of the scalpel tools that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument used by the surgeon, to one side; and this is the form of the tool:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles a cup, and its depth should be according to what is necessary for it, whether the bone is large or thin.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; as there are two ends, one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the abscess that you have incised when extracting the tissue from the bone is wide, and it is secure from post-operative infection, then you will adjust the two edges of the abscess with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is minor or you fear a post-operative infection, use clean drapes and powders according to the extent of the wound's incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an infection occurs post-operatively, apply clean bandages with rose oil and honey, and place them over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the pain and inflammation are severe due to a bone fracture or cut, apply a paste made of ground wheat flour mixed with egg albumen, place it over the affected area, and wrap it tightly with cloth. Then, sprinkle powdered herbs twice over the foot and the paste; take a thin wooden rod from a table, whose length is about a palm or slightly longer than the affected area, and rest it on top of the paste. Again, apply more paste, cover it with another cloth, and wrap it around the rod; then turn it upside down, carefully remove the cloth and the paste, and gently reduce (the area) until the stricture of the fracture disappears. This is something that should not be neglected.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the star (scintilla) above the broken bone is not dislodged; and so that you see the malady each day, if the ligament becomes softened or you notice the star already dislodged, then correct it and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then hold the patient's sleep (or rest) over their collarbone, and place a small cushion beneath it to keep the pressure on them during the night; so that at that time, the assistants supporting them from the side of that area are elevated, and thus the fracture of the furcula (a term related to the shoulder blade) is raised from the muscle's position; or, alternatively, their arm is lifted to the collarbone.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the binding unless you notice improvement in the area or an aperture (postem) within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see that it is falling off, adjust its tightness, and restore it; leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula (shoulder blade) is healed and hardened.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and relieved according to the need in 28 days, and in some cases in certain men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of it, not the root but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the root is broken—and it is broken in the middle part of it—it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a powder made from almonds and honey over the wound; also, use a double cloth poultice; and place a thin table side by side according to the length of the spatula, or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the blade is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should cover that concavity with a stop and adjust the blade according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly over the dilated tongue with a constrictive band, keeping the blade in place so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the condition daily; every time it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the blade if it moves from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 10 days or 25th days. (Assuming 'xx' and '.xxv' represent numerical values, with 'xx' being 10 and '.xxv' being 25th)
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and be sure that it is from among the bones of which the beginning is not to be feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the pes (foot) bone and place a clamp there, then cut over it, hold it, and act as we have said in the fracture of the spur of the ischium of the pelvis, carefully if this should happen here.
Capitol .vii.	**Capital VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Foot.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle part, and this heals slowly; its ends, however, are quickly healed and solidified.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the accidents of the body when the middle part of it is broken, it inclines to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, severe leaning and vomiting of blood; it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be placed between their thighs; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs with both hands, delicately perform the operation in every way possible that is suitable to it, so that the shape of the bone returns according to its original state.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a plaster and stopgap over it, using a thin sheet of willow or calamus and similar materials in elevation, wrapping them in cloth; delicately attach that to the broken bone without damaging it; periodically adjust the binding according to the curve of the back, tightening that with due stricture; and consider the binding at all times, tightening it when it softens.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cause the detachment of that corruption or pressure or pain or abscess that occurs in the area, then you cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what happened through the method of treating it; and then return the plaster to its place if appropriate, so that it heals.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of bones when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur unless there is a severe impact on the back; and in the case of their ends, away from the point of departure, it does not cause compression to those parts except through what they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense of the patient through the inquiry of it in these places.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it joins the fracture in the best way possible, as it is covered, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal organs, it causes severe pain and piercing to the patient, similar to the pain caused by a stab wound; due to this, the bone sticks into the body; and it results in difficulties in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this condition is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were ingenious with their knowledge of these things.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from their knowledge, they say: Cover the food that causes inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should consider this before it causes a slight delay in healing and leads to an abscess if not treated; and if it does occur, then immediately provide aid for it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They say that some rest on the windward side and suck in strength from it, which seems reasonable, but there is fear that the wind might blow excess fluid to the affected area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They say that one should cover the affected area with cloth previously soaked in hot oil, place pillows between the ribs until it is filled, and wrap it according to its shape; also, treat the illness with food and medicine pleurisy.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the pain is intense and the patient suffers greatly, and the bone punctures through its covering, one should be concerned about the illness, uncover the affected area, exposing the broken rib, and then place a tool over it to preserve its integrity; remember how it happened, and carefully cut the bone to extract what is stuck.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we carefully adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by sewing, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside the hernia, cut it open and insert poultices in warm oil over the area, and treat the patient with what covers the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it is recommended that the patient be turned over onto their side on which they sleep until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	**Chapter IX.**
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Spinal Vertebrae and the Collarbone.**
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, fractures occur in the bones of the collarbone, and they should be treated by compressing and securing them, resembling the treatment of spinal vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you encounter this in anyone and wish to know whether it will heal or not, consider: for if their hands or feet are already softened and numbed and dead, and they cannot move them nor tighten them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle they feel no pain, then you know that it is not curable, and in such cases the condition is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel constriction and pain in the joints and pressing and piercing, then know that the night of the bone is safe and that the malady will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck resembling this and wish to know whether it will heal or not, consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now, if you find that they are already softened, and it happens to those parts that were affected in the hands or feet, and when they lie on their backs, they have difficulty breathing and movement is against their will, and sometimes they turn over onto their backs and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not bother with their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If you do not cause any additional damage, the cause is better and more easily treated.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is that you pierce the seat of the abscess with a cauterizing iron that is heated to a moderate temperature, or use poultices of hot oil or vinegar; apply this to that area several times a day until the abscess is healed by the cauterization.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then remove one of the comfortable and effective bandages, tighten it around that area, and instruct the patient to rest, maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the affected side until the pain is gone.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If it becomes necessary to remove the attachment of a bone or any other cause that is already separated from it, then clean the wound thoroughly and expose the cut bone; adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing them if necessary; and tend to any inflammation around the incision until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the tail of the bone is broken and it is the end of the leg, then insert your left hand's little finger into the fissure, and swallow the broken bone with your other hand as best you can using a second-degree leverage; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel fractured bones in it, then apply pressure over that area and immobilize it, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes its healing.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	**On the Restoration of Health.**
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limbs are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is usually a communication to the extremities of those parts, extending in length and declining inward; it causes pain to the patient at the site and a numb sensation when broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the end of it, then you should wrap that second according to what you have been equipped with, just as another part that is assembled to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or has already declined to the parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have done that, place a plaster on it, and then place another on the splint of wood or leather, and tighten by compression without fear of puncturing the fracture or removing the sternum.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the concavity with something that will give it compression equally, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you encounter an apothema (abscess) cautiously, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the apothema is sedated, and place over it what has been mentioned before; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a bandage.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if fracture occurs in the long bones or they are broken, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fractured assistant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant (adjutori) is the space between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a plate of moderate thickness and shape it as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And two ligaments are seen in both extremities, then they should be suspended from the elevated position.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a side; then, with a swift motion, throw your broken arm over the pole until it reaches the middle point of the curve of the pole where it is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over any heavy cause or the minister extends this to the parts below; and the doctor should place his hands on the fracture, holding it until the break returns to its place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient should be placed on their back and hold the collar of the neck with one hand, while the other two ministers hold the parts above and below the fracture, each extending it to their respective ends.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish the extension to be stronger, tighten your hold on the fracture with ligaments and on another ligament, so that each of the two assistants extend in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, you must stop half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half behind the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the elbow, you must stop the ligament at that place and over the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Use all of those that are easy and suitable for the task, and then as they are wrapped according to how they should be applied, tighten them if there is no risk of apoplexy with caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If there is a risk of apoplexy, do not tighten it within the seventh day, and cover it with woolen thread soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil until the swelling subsides, and then tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to tighten it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster, adjust the arm over that helper, and keep your hand open on its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then secure the cloth and tighten it around the arm helper to keep the arm in place without any movement, if it doesn't contravene any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that over the fracture, one splint should be placed on each side and made stronger than the others; and between each splint, the distance of the said bone should be maintained, and the length of the splints according to the break, adding three parts from the whole length.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the splints with the tension already mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your tightness over the fracture site should be made even tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the tighter the fracture is held, the less pressure there will be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore, by adjusting the position of the bones and maintaining the tightness as we have mentioned in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, you will succeed.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear infection, then release the tightness and reposition the bones within the next seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all cases for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation at the site; avoid food that reaches the member due to excess tightness; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that no such cause exists, then do not loosen the bandage but leave it for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's rest in this position with their thighs supported, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And apply a hot compress filled with wool fat, and consider at all times during the night or day that the shape of the broken member should not be distorted or loosened, so correct it as much as your ability permits.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide the patient with food as previously ordered, beginning with a light diet so that it does not begin to strain them; and then gradually increase their food intake.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the usual practice of using supports and leg rests, they should be kept tight for about 10 days; and then they should be loosened and baths should be administered and medications applied to those parts to correct the condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is clean, you must not remove the ligaments and stitches for one to two months.
Capitol .xii.	**Chapter XII**
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	**On the Restoration of Broken Arms**
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm and the upper arm; the smaller one being that which ends in the wrist, and the larger one being that which rests below it, extending upward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone is broken only, or the smaller one, they are usually shattered together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken at the wrist, its restoration is easier, and healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fracture of a bone is severe, the healing of it is bad and difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And another bad consequence is when two bones break simultaneously.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is a small bone at the end, it is appropriate for the doctor to intervene, and you should restore it with small extensions until it is completely healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the broken bone is a large one, then it requires more extensive restoration as it is more severe.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones break simultaneously, then the extraction must be done with greater force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must position the hand in such a way for restoration and the extension of the fracture over a cushion, with the palm of the hand above all other parts, the thumb lower than the rest, and the patient's discomfort centered on a well-prepared bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion before them or behind them, directly against their condition, so that the illness does not worsen.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the person suffering from pus further down with his hand or bandage, and another minister extends similarly on top.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor aligns the bone within that reduces according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are many pieces, then you must completely reduce them all to their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a complete separation that cannot be restored, then you should terminate it and maintain the position as we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is a serious matter, you have already made a specific point to it, so now take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your recovery, you should wrap a linen bandage with a paste made of rosin oil and white wax, applying it gently between the bones and joints until the abscess subsides; then remove the bandage and apply a poultice prepared from powdered chalk, and place staples; and let the staple be the one that holds the fracture most securely.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the names of the bones in the arm are arranged in the greatest order, either in a single focus or in two foci together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then tighten your bandage over the fracture most firmly and vigorously, and as the tightness on the parts above the fracture or below it increases, loosen the bandage slightly according to how much relief is felt at the beginning of the treatment.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the sheets that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, the thread used to bind them should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the members and their ligaments after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, as you perceive what happens to the member, then apply water or some other remedy to the affected member until the pressure ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And allow the member to relax until it rests, then return to the stricture (or original position).
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness has already been relieved and the bone has healed and seems like those (before), then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excess tightness, for then you know that you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not present any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to expect relaxation within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And it is also necessary to keep the patient's hand suspended due to the virtue of its agitated movement, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or a strong one in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the virtue's dispositions.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the broken bone of the hand and its joints.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the joint of the hand and its bones often suffer from wear and tear, and this is not caused by sudden accidents but rather by gradual motion.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when an injury or strain occurs in the hand, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and lie them down with their injured arm extended. Then place your hand over it to provide support.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them so that they grow together correctly.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And you should know how to apply bandages and stoppages carefully, otherwise gangrene may occur; then cover it with a cloth according to the area's size, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is within the deep parts of the palm, then make it like a thread of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze that part of their fractured palm; then pull the long cloth tightly.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star of light be like a cloth in which the body is enveloped, and squeeze it according to how much it covers.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with a cloth and another cloth on the opposite side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and then apply pressure, as the hand is rotated to its normal position between the said ligamentz.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in any of the joints, and it is the little finger, then bind it tightly according to how much it covers, and press it against the palm; and if you wish, place a small cloth right under it so that the fracture is raised and not damaged.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any other digit, just as in that of the middle joint, or in the index, or in the little finger, it should be enveloped and tied to the finger itself; or all the joints should be tied in succession, which is better; or it should rest on that small bone, as we have said regarding the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and return that, the arrangement of abscesses carefully and oppositely - in accordance with your operation - regarding what covers when any cause of those occurs, as is described repeatedly about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Bone in the Thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, revealing itself to the air according to its conversion to the surrounding condition and the pus that surrounds it.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament left over the fracture, and the patient is prostrated on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the physician should extend the ligament to its proper extent according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is deemed necessary to open the wound, then its ligament should be pulled in the opposite direction from the thigh, so that extension occurs within it, and another ligament left over the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is deemed to be on the opposite side, then its ligament should be pulled in that direction, and the extension made at the parts left over.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the physician should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as much as possible according to their natural appearance, and the bone is united by a good joint; then it is necessary to cover with plaster and tension, if not the member will become amputated.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it occurs in an abscess, leave it for a few days until the abscess has healed, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be done thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the leg band near the joint, bringing the ends of the cloth from both parts above the two joints, then wrap again over the leg and the thigh where the excess of the bandage is.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your weight on the thigh at the location of that fracture gently, and put a splint across those bones of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong constriction around the middle of the fracture site using three or four layers, and as you move further away from the site of the fracture, the constriction should be less severe and more gentle and moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the bandage to the sides, keeping them within the foot's cavity, and tighten both ends of the bandages from the other side to prevent the ligament from moving from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then secure the constriction so that it does not cause any damage to the corrupted member or lead to gangrene or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any of those occur, then it is necessary to remove the constriction and correct what has happened immediately, as we have said repeatedly.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a bone pain in a bone that you cannot remove, then cover it with what is available to you; otherwise, wrap it and treat the one from which the pain arises until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned with just bandages, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring it in this manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is only restored, then another bandage should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that he does not limp from the one that was troubled.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is strained in 10 or 30 days, or a month, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Capitol .xv.**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the broken collarbone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that the fracture of the collarbone in the shoulder often leads to prolonged pain, and may result in chronic stiffness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is not merely a crack or break in its parts, but a severe injury that becomes a great affliction, and over which one has no control.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And its restoration involves reattaching what has been broken from its parts, and rejoining them as closely as possible through appropriate means and with ease in their fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster over that round scar, if necessary; and use tightness on it as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And now consider all the dispositions that we have recounted in other fractures, thus with care and similarly to those that oppose any accident that is suitable for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick, and it is called the femur; and the other is thin, and it is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the restoration of the arm itself, and the operation on it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is broken subtly, the leg is shattered in pieces above.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone is broken very thickly, it will protrude, and it is among those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extension, compression, and traction of the bones according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is clean without many pieces, extension should be less and more gentle, and it is better to leave it to nature's healing.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is no cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the steels and complete all the tie operation that you will take wooden splints from the part left with the causes that are set alone, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; you align them from those to which coarse treatment is required, and do not use excessive force on the hands, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the inner side to the outer side.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, place one at the opening of the leg from one side and another from the other side, ensuring they are all within the proper depth of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then secure the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, so that with this structure the leg is prevented from bending at the left and right openings, and it remains in a stable position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the leg; it should be placed on the leg to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially ensure that you do this in case of fracture, and when that pain is truly acute.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg in each subsequent day, studying it closely to discern any delays or inflammations or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, be prepared to treat it with what is appropriate until healing takes place.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer a fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures, and the toes rarely experience fractures but instead undergo atrophy due to poor positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones become dislocated from one another, then the patient should place their foot on the ground in a prepared position as they heal.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a foot over what is elevated due to the dislocated bones, and press down on them, and tighten them until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten it firmly to the foot with its natural curvature, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation on these is as well-known to you.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if someone says it is broken, then restore them, entangle them as they were, and with your skill, re-align the bones in their place.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then make the split according to the length of the bone, and a little on one side; and place the foot on this table which is now aligned, and tighten it firmly with its natural curvature.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then place your hand over each piece as it is wrapped in a cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and while standing on one of the table's legs, make an incision in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that we have mentioned regarding other fractures from accidents that we have discussed; and pay attention to every accident related to this.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII.**
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	**On Fractures of the Hip Bone, the Thigh Bone, and the Shin Bone in Men and Women.**
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone of a woman is broken, make her lie on her side, and gently tilt her towards the broken leg slightly, and hold her behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the cavity with warm water and makes it so as to expect; and the woman is made to bend, and slowly lifts her two legs, until everything is removed inside while the cavity is open and the broken bone returns in place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place poultices on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them remove the bandage easily, collect the urine, then clean and return the poultice in the same manner as before, and bring them back to their initial position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch over the patient's wound a tube of canvas; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with a bandage and remains for some days as we have recommended, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and healing of it we administer what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not obscured in these close fractures and poses little danger, especially for those who have some knowledge and understanding of this my written work; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions for the correct treatment of its restoration and stricture. And therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's leg when it is broken, take a splint from above and place it on the leg; then wrap it with a cloth bandage, and let it be so wrapped, and lay it up for three days or around those times, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are afflicted.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an accident, especially if the bone is large, as in the case of the thigh or any similar bone, that you immediately perform a flebotomy on him if the conditions for flebotomy indicate it, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection spreads to the blood, then you must stop the flow of blood by applying pressure over it with a clean cloth as soon as possible, unless there is another reason that requires immediate attention.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture as soon as possible on that day, and do not delay it, if otherwise there is a risk of abscess formation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs cautiously, leave its restoration within the ninth day, until it is resolved, and do not touch it on the third day and the fourth of every month, lest you cause more harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone breaks off prominently at the exposed joint, cover and protect yourself from perforating to reduce it, and bind it with your hands as easily and sparingly as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is beyond your control and the condition of it requires your hands, then reduce it with your hands or this instrument; an instrument that is made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and a width according to the extent of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these, according to the amount required for treatment in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And once done, it should be in small pieces to prevent the risk of it bending during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of sharp extremity where its margin is in their extremities; and the upper part of it should tend to thicken, and from its middle part within to the fissures.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "voluntary lip hernia" in Greek, hence the term is rare.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the part that requires the acute extremity of it to be raised above the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should be applied at once as soon as the bone returns, and be wrapped with some bandage.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	So therefore wrap the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and you do not grasp it with good force, then you must insert the end of that bone within while the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot return the bone to its original position, then cut open that part which we have mentioned for it using scissors or saw in any way possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cut away the one that is stuck on the rough bone with small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned to its place and the hernia is reduced, if the patient feels intense pain, you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural position, and thus you have brought great relief to the malady.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once you have completed the bone restoration, immerse a sterile black cloth in vinegar and, especially in summer, do not place it directly on the wound or any other area where there is oil, so as to prevent putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply staples at the appropriate time for the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can incise and use forceps and wraps according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the wound against the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, and cause death or severe corrosion or putrefaction in their patients, which is unclean.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the contraction is slight, flexible, different from the contraction of other fractures,
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are afraid of further complications that we have discussed, and there is pain in the area, do not apply pressure to it, but rather use a hard wrap of cloth instead of staples and tighten it around those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the pain begins to manifest itself, with heat generated in that part, then remove from over it the cloth which you had placed there, and administer certain remedies, applying those which according to our custom we use for such plagues, thus as a poultice of tetracyclic and similar substances.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is expedient that you clean the wound and consider the plague each day and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the surrounding parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated nor does the pus leave the affected part, then know that here are only measures to alleviate the pain so that you can always tend to the wound.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, some are separated and removed, others cannot be separated and place the member under pressure, causing pain; therefore, incise them as you find possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, which is a sign of inflammation and decay, then cover each one of these with whatever is appropriate for its cure, as described in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning what I must say and you present your case: when the flesh is torn, it protrudes over the member, resembling the bones of the thigh and its support, and does not give way or allow extraction, as these movements cause death; after leaving that space open for a few days, perhaps 2 or 3, then cure the wound if you have observed it, but leave it if not.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	**On the Cure for Nodules That Occur at the Site of a Fracture.**
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motions witnessed occur during the healing process of a fracture, particularly near joints, and it is hindered by the shape of the member; thus, it prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the displacement is recent and administer those medications that have been strictly indicated for it, such as aloe, senna, digestion, and similar ones; in this way, take some or all of them, and apply those with a styptic effect, or albumen from eggs, or vinegar, and place them over the nodule in a compress, and tighten those around it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And note that the compression should not be released for several days; then loosen it and repeat with another, as long as the nodule persists; or fasten a lead sheet over it, as lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the nodule has already changed to a hard state and its tightness causes discomfort, then cut it away from the surrounding tissue carefully, remove any excess and prominent parts, or clean it with a sharp knife, as long as it remains undeterred; and treat that part until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of a fracture, once it is healed, then the delicate member should be wrapped gently according to its natural shape.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the delicate member is gently wrapped, it should not be done for trivial reasons: among which one is an abundance of solution of the ligament and the binding done improperly; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the limb; or because of too much excess in application; or due to inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or because of poor circulation of blood in the patient's body, and due to weakness of the member.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to restrict the patient's movement and make their body relaxed while increasing the blood flow in the affected area; administer baths, and use gauze and bandages with care and joy upon it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place your hand over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the most nutritious moisture or continues the application of lukewarm water, until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the healing of broken bones that have been restored crookedly and the prohibition of their operation, if it covers them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of its crookedness and bulging bone should be sought, and this is done by reshaping the form of the member; however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, as long as you receive the permission of him who considers that member newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is highly reprehensible, losing great fear of the sign of which it is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If recent claudication and nodulation are present, then immerse them in tepid water containing herbs that soften the affected areas, such as althae and razite, and melilot, similar to those used in preparations; apply a mollifying plaster, or use a mixture of althae razite and either a grey of guine or oil of cerame, and cover with a plaster; or employ fresh fat figs pressed between women's thighs, similar to the medicaments known as consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with regular gentle friction on the moistest areas, and movements of the affected member should be repeated at all times during the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already progressed and becomes rigid, twisted, and transformed into a stone, making its cure necessary by knife, then it is important to note that pus on the surface ceases and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and a cut is made at the excess of nodules from that side using fine osteotomes, and ease is provided to that part with diligence and care.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the dislocation of a joint from its proper position, preventing movement and causing deformity in the affected member, leading to severe pain and injury in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when any dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible; if delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, if it is not reduced immediately during the period of stiffness, spasms and severe pain occur in the muscles and joints.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this happens, you must then perform a fluoroscopy of the affected area to identify the dislocation and reduce it as follows: place a cushion under the patient's body to rest the dislocated joint; immerse the member in hot water and oil, and then carefully reduce the dislocation.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with the liquid whose recollection will come to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as mentioned in the fracture; from the part of the body above, go down to the part below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated without pain, the displacement of both is caused in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with a little pressure, and then softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so much that saliva from the wound cannot pass, and neither can he close his mouth, nor can his tongue be moved.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of a limb is slight, it returns to its proper position on its own without much cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and serious, it is necessary to administer a gradual reduction of the limb without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the practitioner has the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and all the other fingers are outside, which equal them; and he orders the patient to cease moving their jaws and to relax so that they return to their proper place. The doctor also holds the jaw and gently pushes it back until it returns to its location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with water and oil, while gently performing the reduction of both until they return to their proper place, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they return and are properly wrapped up, the opening of the hernia is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of cloth over those dust-like poultices, made of cera and finely ground oil; and apply it easily and gently.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back with their head between two pillows, so that they do not wince to either the right or left side; and do not force them in any way to swallow; having taken their food, wait until the pains are relieved and the jaws are relaxed, then let them cry out what they will.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated; do not work on the opening of the mouth due to eating, drinking and belching, as long as the jaw is sore and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated at any time and do not return to their proper places, then feverish events occur, frequent vomiting, severe abdominal pain in the patient, and strong, clear cholera is thrown up.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and often the man who suffers from this dies in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	**Chapter 25**
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	**On the Reduction of the Dislocated Furcula and Extremity of the Muscle**
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the shoulder within its continuation towards the leg; however, sometimes it is dislocated at the point where it departs, and this is evident upon examination.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient retains the pain in their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then tighten the area with your palm using a firm compression, so it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply pressure to that poultice and compress it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the end of the limb that is affected is dry and continues to be so for some time, it will not become dislocated; then it must be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to that poultice, and compress it, and use restraint to make the patient adhere to quietness and rest until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this treatment, the cure is to reduce the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that a muscle is not displaced in one way only but according to three manners, of which one is its displacement at the attachment point on one side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is displaced at the attachment from above on the muscle, and this is done with care; and it is not displaced at the rear attachments through the shoulder; and it is not displaced at the front attachments by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly displaced and comes out at the attachment points on the sides after the tendon, especially in those where there is little flesh, it is slightly displaced; but more so in those where there is a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from sudden impacts or falls, and the muscle of him is attached to a fixed cautery, and it is cut through what has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, understand that your strength enters here while you are superior to it, and you will proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you find among these different manifestations; you find in the head of the muscle its concavity and place the thorn after touching the head of the muscle thus as if a bow, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position nor move it.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you find obvious touching, it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, slight reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to its place; and he places the cushions under the thorn of his muscle, and supports the joint with strength in its place, and the minister raises the hand of him, and extends it until it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It is not possible to provide a precise translation without further context and knowledge of the specific dialect or historical nuances involved. However, based on the given text, a possible translation for this line could be: "Since what has been said does not return, from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, for several days, it is necessary that the illness be bathed in warm water and administered herbs that soften and line the joints as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on their back and rested with a cushion under them, awaiting that it becomes engulfed in relaxation and tension, and then the doctor places his hand over the area, raising the head of the muscle towards verticity, pulling the patient's limb away from the joints to prevent further damage, and another attendant holds the patient's head so that it is not damaged by the movements, for then it will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: it is to make present a man who is taller than the illness, and stands on the side of that joint, and inserts his muscle into the area below the cushion where the illness is, and raises the cushion above the joints until the illness is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand away from the joints beneath their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the disease is light, then it is necessary to understand what other cause might be suspended, so that it does not worsen, for the dislocation may return soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: take a long stick with a rounded end like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the patient; then press down on the head of the stick with lion's cloth, and the pain will stand according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand from the other side to the opposite part; and strengthen the other side, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is equal to the span of two arms, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then cover the head with soft cloth to prevent the wound from becoming infected.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place yourself in a comfortable position, extending your hand or arm over the wound within the opening, and position the cloth over the wound, covering the assistant, arm, and end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Position yourself with your arm at ease on a scale according to the wound's location, extending your hand over the opening, while the other assistant holds the patient from the opposite side, ensuring the joint is stabilized momentarily.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And once the insertion is complete according to any method you find feasible, wait until you place a thick layer of woolen thread, prepared in advance with powder from a mill and egg album over all the muscles, ensuring it is thoroughly wrapped around it, and then bind the thread tightly; wrap the ligature over the padding, attach the patient's hand to their collarbone, and leave it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient's food intake is limited, until the member is comfortable, as it is lighter on the healing of the injury.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then gradually increase the food intake and exercise; and thus if it is stopped and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then ensure that a hot cautery is applied to it as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are reduced several times, but it cannot raise that arm to its normal position, then know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is affected, you must reduce the foot and ankle or the joints behind, by pressure and extension of the limbs, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both these treatments should be applied to that other constraint, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes critical in the member and delayed in its movement, then the malady uses numerous baths at intervals until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all parts, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when the bone is out of place or by some figure dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And take care to cover the wounds and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes close to becoming gangrenous, for if it becomes gangrenous, its reduction is difficult, and its cure complete; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causes greater pain, and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, involves extending the patient's hand with two more people, expanding their arm, and the doctor's hands should be on the thigh and beneath them, pushing the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its proper place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return the hand by bending it with the other hand, striking the thigh with the back of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend their arms, and they hold this object with two ministers so that it does not slip from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then turn the arms over all parts, because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over their hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that these causes which lead to the friction of the joint be helped, and then he gently pushes and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then the hernia should be reduced and placed over the paste in which there is stiffness and the application of egg albumen, and it should be extracted with relaxation and lowering, and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the bandage from it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not too strained, apply the plaster and lubricant, leave it for some days until it becomes detached, then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it is a case of severe inflammation and the joint is in a state of movement, then apply moistening in the form of baths and subtle friction, and keep them elevated, until it is healed; or place a cooling compress on the affected joint, especially if it involves fatty movement; and after it is bound, leave it on the bone during the day and take it off at night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove the bandage and immerse that part in a bath; when clean, gently rub the joint with a warm friction, repeat this process three times daily, until it becomes mobile again.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bath, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and scalped slit of the cow's flank, press and tighten it; do this several times, for that part is moist and returns to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the shoulder joint is dislocated, and its reduction is delicate; on the other hand, other joints are easier to reduce, but it is essential to be quick in reducing a dislocated shoulder right after it occurs, before the area becomes inflamed or develops an abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocated shoulder is that you place the patient's hand on a table and make them extend their arm, while the doctor places his hand or palm over the joint, pushing it until it returns to its position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the illness rests the back of the hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes this, then the position of the hand from within should be over the table, so that the doctor's hand can act upon that imminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if this can be done soon, it is good; otherwise, strengthen that compress gently, give time, and let it heal; for if you do not allow it to heal, neither will you be able to achieve the reduction of the hernia any further than by passing days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint should be moved according to its stiffness; do not force the patient, for the hand must be softened and cannot grasp any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and it is only by cauterization near their attachment that you can strengthen them, which will give them some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the disease returns, place your hand on the poultice we have prepared and leave it there for several days; then loosen it, leave it be, and exercise your hand upon it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then apply gentle heat and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	**Capitol .XXIX.** (Note: The number XX9 indicates a chapter title, not a page number.)
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the Treatment of Dislocation of Joints**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the joints become completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated, either to the back of the hand or the belly, then straighten the joint and push the dislocation back into place with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and stretch it until it is properly aligned on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to this narration, continue to stretch it as described during the day and exercise movements with it, and do so for several days until it is completely straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, stretch it and attach it to that opening, performing the first operation carefully until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	This appears to be a section heading or a chapter title, possibly indicating "Chapter XXX" in the treatise. Without further context, it's difficult to provide a translation.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a spinal or cervical vertebra becomes dislocated, it often results in severe pain as the adjacent vertebrae are displaced from their normal positions. Without prompt treatment, this condition can be life-threatening due to potential damage to the patient's health.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Another indication of this condition is that the patient cannot voluntarily control their symptoms; they may experience weakness in one or both legs, arms, or hands, as nerves are affected. Sometimes, a vertebra becomes dislocated and, in such cases, it is imperative to reduce (realign) it immediately, as prolonged displacement can lead to permanent damage.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Once the dislocation is reduced (back) to its original position, it is referred to as subluxation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for this condition involves careful consideration, especially in cases of childhood dislocation, as it may not heal properly on its own and complete recovery might be unlikely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those cases that occur by chance or through percussion or similar to these, the Ancients have already described treatment methods in lengthy speech, from which the greatest benefit returns; you may have already been briefly excused from that of too much light, due to my close proximity to my intention, which I hereby expose and shape with various instruments, from which I will now show and space out that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in the inflammation that occurs at the beginning in the foot, there is neither cure nor healing for it; similarly in cases that are done on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of these, only the one that occurs on the spine itself is curable with what you have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	For the disease has spread over his face, touching both sides near the wall, and it has caused great pain within him such that his feet cannot be moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a straight stick under them, pressing it into the ground at the end of the foot near the head, and another stick on the other side of their feet at the opposite end of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, but not press it into a pit; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the patient's head and leave the titillating liens to hold them fast; extend the end of the ligament to the stick which is against their head, and bind that to them; and then tighten the other ligament over their hips, supporting their legs, and adjust all the ligaments, binding those to the other stick which is against their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister should slowly extend the ligament to the end of the stick, and the two sticks and the ligaments in their respective places where they are fixed should not be loosened, but nevertheless they should not be tightly bound as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is very close to where the patient's malady lies.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, pressing firmly until the spine is bent and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open again the space which is turned with the hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground, holding the patient's head at the back of his legs with two fists, whose length is a brass, and hold his head at the back of his eyes with two fists exactly; and let the distance between each fist be a palm, and make incisions in each fist where the pain runs out, and hold each limb firmly on the ground so that it is not moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take a rod made of wood, in which the thorn is embedded, and turn it around in both channels of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a channel in which the rod is formed, its length being about a palm where it is turned; and the other two rods are similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the patient's foot in the passage where it is necessary to remove its head, and the ligaments that you have tightened on their thighs in the turn that leads to their legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then remove each turn and place a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor ties the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleaned, then apply a dry, albumen paste, and stop; then place it on the paste as a board whose width is three or four times the length of the affected area, and its length is such that it covers the region of the redness, and above the departure of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then use the aforementioned remedy, employing subtle nourishment for the patient until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If any signs of recurrence appear in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered through a long course, as we have recommended; indeed, this has already been applied to that site in the form of a lead plate.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there can be an imminent danger at the end of the spine joints, resulting from dislocation; it is that bone which you must not ignore, as it requires prompt attention to this treatment, for otherwise it will cause severe pain and potentially death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital .XXIX.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not dislocate unless there is a sudden movement or a concave shape, which does not happen to other joints with small removal.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either inside or outside, in front or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inside, and rarely in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inside is that when you straighten the patient's leg with the aid of a splint, it becomes longer and the inner side is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot normally, and this is the place where the tendons become inflamed from inflammation, so that the tip of the bone has already been damaged here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which happens when a dislocation occurs is that the parts are outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of that which happens when a dislocation occurs in the front part is when the leg expands fully but does not bend at the joint, and if it perforates to go backwards and cannot return to the front parts; then the urine of the patient is retained and the engorgement of the limb becomes apoplectic, and you must move the limb of the patient over the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of that which happens when a dislocation occurs in the back part is that it does not expand the leg, nor can it bend the joint opposite to where it bends, and the leg becomes shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the matter is turned to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of the symptoms of this dislocation is that you consider, when the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been reduced by itself or with appropriate treatment according to its position, then it is not necessary for that same cure to be performed; and thus it does not cover all that should be done in such a case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place it on that which has a recent dislocation, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then reduce the joint by bringing it back to its position and stretching it within and without, and turn it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the joint further below, or apply a bandage, or a ligament that is tight over the leg; another minister should extend the hand of the patient above thus applying pressure to the joints; and yet another should tighten the ligament at the root of the thigh, and have someone else hold the end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And either extend the leg or the part within to angle the part of the furca, or the back part to the part of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all of these at once, so long as the patient's condition is elevated to their chest and the hanging parts are relaxed.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is especially common to all four (parts/sides).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all sorts of things regarding its treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the gaps, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be pulled over the edge of the gap at the location where the base of the hernia and the area left between the hernia's head and the place enter meet; and then extend the ligament above the angle from the part of the bone to the highest point of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then, another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's arms, press the bulge of the hernia, and extend it outward by vigorously stretching it, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specific type is of a lighter cure by which this member is reduced compared to other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from you and you do not adhere to the treatment of this type of cure at all, then understand that both feet of the patient must be tied together lightly, less tightly, on both the toes and both the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be such that it is four times as much as the other, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by a quantity of two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the bottom; and the length of it from the ground should be two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the thigh, and suspend it from another young person over the hernia; and another young person should press the thigh with great force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction of a dislocation that has occurred outside, it is necessary to keep the patient in a position of flexion as we have recommended regarding its gel-like state; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh and on the patient's chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two sticks as supports: one at the patient's feet and another at their head; and place a moist cloth over the affected area to prevent the pain from being aggravated by the stick being wedged between their thighs, so that you can avoid any further damage.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend their expertise, and the doctor should guide the reduction according to art (or skill/method).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow these instructions, they will be very effective; otherwise, insist diligently on those mentioned in the previous state of gel-like condition through this engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient lies on their back at ease.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected limb, then with his other hand he pulls it gently, and by applying this traction, he returns the limb to its proper place.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not extend the patient on the sides, but rather elevate him above the ground; once you have ensured that he lies still on a firm surface, just as we mentioned regarding his position over two sheets, and his face and limbs are extended, as we have said, without any hindrance.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be administered compression with a splint over the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not concealed to you, since you spread apart two thighs from the patient, and when you see those folds and the hernia extrudes its thigh and you expand that excusion, then you know that the member according to need has been returned; and then you adjust two things, place a bandage, and bind tightly so that the opening is not worsened in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligature and bandage, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those folds on the surface, you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and then you can release the patient.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and bandage it, and pull it back according to your initial stretch, and release it in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then, he should be slowly mobilized again over some days until he is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter .XXXII.** 
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: when it shifts to the outside parts, and when it moves inside, and sometimes in front of the parts, but not in the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of joint displacement is that you command the patient to apply their leg against the thigh; then you know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient cease directly, so that they extend their leg if possible; hold their back with both hands, and place their foot between your knees; then do adhere the joint of the patient to your palms, and press those between your fingers over the joint of the patient until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of the patient's recovery is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to stick the leg to the thigh, and bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, unless they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer a strong extension to the ligament mentioned in the previous description of treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii indicates the chapter number, not a line-by-line translation.)
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus (a bone in the ankle).
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot, sometimes, is damaged by small removals, and sometimes it is dislocated entirely; the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation is of gentle reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease to the limbs and be guided back into place before it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the treatment of it when dislocated entirely, you must cease the malady directly, and have a strong and capable minister at the back of the joint near its middle location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then with your right hand, you should hold the foot from the top dominant part, and with your left hand, hold it from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then stretch the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand pull it twice upwards, and extend your left leg; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the side opposite the limb being worked on.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot of the patient towards the bed for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one or two turns according to this manner, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that area.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is impossible for you to reduce it in this way that we have recommended, then cause the patient to lie on their back on the ground and make a narrow indentation in the earth, and place a piece of cloth over them between the thighs, and you have already wrapped them in a blanket so that they do not hurt.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds his legs, and another minister stretches the foot with its toes or with the ligature that lies on the top of the foot; and another extends each minister against the extension of his part, and the padding between the patient's thighs retains it, so that the hernia is not pulled away from its position beyond.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor reassures the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the sides, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you perceive the reduction of the hernia to be healthy, then apply a poultice and reinforce that ligature strongly, and tie the foot with the ligature to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind the foot, so that the ligature on that does not become violent and injure it severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then place it there for two days or three; if the swelling subsides, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third or fourth day, remove that (bandage) and forbid the patient from moving for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If, against the doctor's advice, the patient must move and open that space again, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be worsened and left untreated, which is harmful.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms during the treatment, apply what has been described previously for care and cleansing in that area, as long as it is not healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: The exact translation cannot be determined without additional context from the treatise.)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the feet's joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Understand that one who is dislocated should be immersed in some extent of water for treatment; and what is not difficult, it should be lifted before.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some part of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on the ground or on a table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand over the foot, place your weight on it to relieve pressure from the joints, gently press the toe against the ground until it returns to its normal position, and observe that it is re-aligned and does not protrude prominently from the joint.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a board under the patient's foot that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and tighten it gently but firmly for three days; afterwards, remove it and allow the patient to rest from walking for several days until it is completely healed and its strength is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs and you focus on the treatment and restoration of it, you may often see deaths succeeding each other.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, he who presumingly prescribes a cure for it, without understanding, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, patient, merciful and compassionate, should not be hasty or presumptuous; and he should begin medicines with caution, only as much as is necessary, and leave the diagnosis to divine judgment, unless he hopes for salvation from destruction, alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so, as soon as possible, strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than waiting for serious complications.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, when the member returns to its normal position, administer treatment that prevents further apothema and cure the infection with whatever is suitable for it from the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs as a fracture and causes separation of the osseous joints, then you should drill through their statements and do as we have said regarding simple ailments of this type that precede in the places of those mentioned.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my prediction; for what is better for you than your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and brings greater health to your true body in due time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
