Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, as you have completed this book, the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its end and due to its expositions, explanations, and declarations, it seems to me that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the most excellent surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, considered the most excellent art, is scorned in our region and time, as its science is greatly neglected, and its practice has almost disappeared; it is only occasionally that one finds small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have led to confusion and error, as the understanding of its principles is closed off, and its power and skill are diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I have found it necessary to revive that order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be included as an addition to the declaration and as a preparation for the work, which is required.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why our skillful physician lacks complete knowledge in this our time is because the art of medicine is complex and requires understanding the development of the members and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; it demands knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of each, and their extraction; and of the pulsating and static veins, and the places where they exit.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, for in practice it is simple but mainly in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, it is evident that they are likely to make errors which will lead to men's deaths, as you have seen many people thus misinformed in this science gain knowledge only through experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Where you see a foolish doctor who has incurred a scrofulous abscess in the armpit of a woman and cut some arteries in her armpit so that much blood flows until the woman dies from it.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who put a stone from a man who had processed it in his bladder, and the stone was large, he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the vesica, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you had already called for help to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid handsomely by a duke from our land for surgery, and he took a black crack in the leg of a man who had a broken bone; because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the wound, with poultices and bandages tightly stretched, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then, according to his desires, loosen the bandages, rest for some days, and order us to loosen the ligament; and thus it is also done that the thing and the foot are healed and do not become infected.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have been called to loosen the ligament, and by doing so, you achieve calmness and thereby alleviate their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member and it cannot be restrained, then the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until the patient perishes from the illness.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it ulcerates for some days until the pus intensifies the malice of the illness towards its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the sharp cautery is pure of melancholic humor, and then it does not cover that it will reach him entirely with a ferrule, but rather, it should be in the member which suffers that it be entirely removed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of the body should be carefully divided into two parts: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other is in the work which is dangerous to major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are described that contain error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to remember these things and lay them down, so that the ignorant do not dare speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your weapons of diligence and protection from God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means for the grace of God that lead to salvation and glorious success, set aside the terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and abandon your weapons of fear, so that weakness in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains to your glory, both now and forever after in the memories of your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	They already cut open certain of their organs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad ailments with bad medicines, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, starting with the first part of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is organized on the feet, in the forms of instruments and the tools of cautery, and everything necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and also ventoses (suction cups), and plagues (perhaps referring to infected wounds or diseases), and the extraction of arrows and similar objects. It is entirely organized according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a capitulated order from within the foot, and of the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	With fire cautery and acute medicine, and the recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it says that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents thereof is a long and prolix speech, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been said about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and to me, a small part of their discourses suffices, fearing prolongations.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cauterization will benefit every complete whole universally, whether it be of material or its material, except for two complexes, which are complexes with their own material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex with dry and hard material, it becomes disconnected; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to this condition, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate for a disease caused by dryness and hardness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat a disease that is dry and hard with heat and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite state that cauterization is beneficial for all dry and hard diseases that are found in human bodies, since when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the human body dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And they say by way of argument that they have already experimented with this many times before to discover it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate for anyone who has already been exhausted and practiced in the chapter of cautery for subsequent exercises, and who has known the diversity of the composition of humans and the disposition of their ailments within their bodies, the causes of those, and the accidents that befall them, as well as the passage of time regarding those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no cause for fear, especially in the treatment of cold and wet ailments, as all doctors are in agreement regarding these, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery to treat them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know this, my sons, that the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery over medicinal fires, for fire is simple; its action only affects the member that is cauterized, and does not harm other members nearby, but rather with a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of medicinal fires reaches those members where it is applied, and strongly affects the diseased member that is difficult to heal, aiding greatly in its recovery.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Light, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this but rather superfluity. It is already known to us through experience and the long study of the art concerning the truth of causes; for this reason, I excuse the length of my speech, and if it were not that this secret fire, hidden in your body, cannot be read at my leisure, I would have demonstrated by philosophical discourse the quality of the operation in the body and its expulsion through which you eliminate ailments, which would sharpen your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that the times of the year when cautery and binding are most effective are in the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the damage caused by time is overshadowed by the healing of what is thrown off by cautery, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, sharp and decisive, which do not suffer delay, for it is feared of those that come with evil, which is better than to permit further damage to enter through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And so you should not sit on your feet, or sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who consider this disease, which is healed by cautery, to be entirely cured, and they pause at its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus as they believe for it, because cautery is only a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause that pain comes.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its power and virtue in operation and the greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the composition of the illness and the location of his illness, and the virtue of him, and what is prepared within him from the addition of superfluities and humors, and what has been acquired by him through food and similar causes; otherwise, the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a few superfluities and humors, so with dental cautery for pain and similar things, it is possible that the same pain may not return in him, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is often said in popular speech that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a right saying, not because those who understand it believe that it is a cure that profit from medicine or any other cause with cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not but when one administers methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not take effect, and at the end of the cause, one administers a cautery, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and many of the folk physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this but for the equality of the gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not entirely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only causes pain in certain bodies, and cauterizing with fire is good and better than as they said; however, when you make a cautery with hot gold, it is not declared to you, for the gold is consumed according to the quantity you want because of the heat of the fire, and if you place it over the flame, the gold melts into the fire, and sometimes some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman suffers from the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterizing with iron must be done more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have ordered those from the beginning related to the feet, so now I will address what he wants from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Using a hot cautery for headache caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers upon the servant the benefit of humidity and cold, two causes that are the primary source of many rheumatic fluxes, called rigor, from the head to the parts of the senses and of the ears, flowing abundantly, as well as during sleep, and pain in teeth and the throat, and generally for all ills that appear due to cold, similarly to paralysis, sudden weakness, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those ills.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, command that the illness be evacuated using a laxative on the head, for three or four nights, according to the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then he commands them to shave their head, and make that cut between your thighs on a stretcher, and place his hands on the patient's feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then he places the edge of his palm near the patient's nose, between their feet.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the pain in the middle part of the body has been relieved, mark that place with a sign, and then light the olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then he places that on the healthy place marked with a sign, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is slowly constrained, and you remove it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then he slowly lifts his hand and examines the place, and if you notice that any bone is exposed or there is any quantity of blood, lift your hand, and if it does not return to that spot or another, especially if it is cold, then it is as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then apply pressure over the soaked area at the border, and leave it on until the burn scale falls off.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with an ointment made of four ingredients until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the plague opens the skin, the wound heals better and more quickly. Therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the specific nature of the bone is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then remove what is attached to the bone, and clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said others that a pointed cautery should be used on the rear, as it first strengthens the bone deeply, and then relaxes it, and this is the shape of the small cataplasm:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, the vapours of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but rather only to certain people out of fear; and this should be avoided, for me, unless it is absolutely necessary, because the head has been deprived by the solution of its continuity, as we have witnessed in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that comes first is most beneficial and safe for me, and it is from that practice that health comes to this work.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When a chronic and persistent pain occurs throughout the head, and this condition prolongs due to disease, one employs various remedies such as bandages, splints, poultices, emplasters, herbs, cats, dog's feces, and similar things; but most importantly, if cauterization has already been performed using a hot iron that does not address any of the underlying causes, consider this: if the nature of the head disease is strong, and there is no significant external injury or great contusion, then another type of cauterization should be applied.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize the edge of the patient's scalp using a hot iron, where the wound is open.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the wound open and expose the amount of bone as we have found, then cauterize it with a hot iron at the rear part of the head in the area known as the vortex, which is the place where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand there, do not expose the bone, for this disease causes great pain unlike any other cautery on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should describe this cautery in its proper place, because you know that the cautery which treats the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one which is applied to the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capitol terms. (Note: This seems to be a title or heading, not a sentence for translation.)
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe pain arises at the base of the head or extends to the inside of the ear, it is treated with medications that clarify the head, and other remedies which I have mentioned regarding the deviations of illnesses; and if these do not prove effective, cauterization on it is performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May cauterizing medicines that burn, you take a hot pad, and cut it off, excising the ends of them from both sides of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you incise the site of pain in the temple with a scalpel, leaving the thread there, as long as it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then you tighten it with a bandage for a descent constriction and leave it for three hours; afterwards, remove the hot compress, and place the plague on it for two or three days, and then apply a cold compress to the affected area until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you apply that as a poultice until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you choose to do this with some burning medicinal remedies that I have written about in the two preceding tracts on burning medicines, then...
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Apply the cautery iron according to this manner: the fire for the cautery, whose shape is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then apply pressure over the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the skin from being burned—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood stuck by the specific condition of the vein is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vein, raise your hand so that the artery beneath is not affected, preventing the flow of pus.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a compress with salt water over the area and leave it for three days; subsequently, apply a poultice with many herbs, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize the end of the scalpel with a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this recent wound.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of old wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat an old wound as we have discussed in the previous sections on disease treatment and it does not respond to treatment, and the pain intensifies due to the malady that is not being sufficiently addressed with either the initial cauterization with medicine or fire, then know that you should ignite the cuttle cautery until it turns white, indicating its readiness. Place your hand over the area once for a moment, then pause as you insert the arceria (possibly a surgical instrument) and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which is badly affected by chewing, and that the injury does not adhere and the nerves which cause that pain do not go into spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is blocked, because in the blocking of it there is fear, especially to those who do not understand what they are doing and are impatient; and let the operation on him begin at the outset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you come to the recollection of the regulation of the flow of blood in accidents of the artery according to their manner, at your place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to the cautery and you see that the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on the stretching of archery with a cautery that has two points, this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	**Capitol (Chapter)**
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by irritation and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery, which is known as a "puncta," and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the puncta close to the heat source, and it should be moved around the entire ear with a circular motion or in any pattern if the pain is in any part of it.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	After using the cautery for the initial treatment of the ear, slowly remove it from the area to prevent any further irritation.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with numerous puncta is applied all over the ear, and it reacts as expected, then treat the areas within that have been cleansed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species (varicose veins) that come from flux, as we have said in the divisions of maladies.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of varicose vein with squeezing and popping, and do not confirm your cure, then know that you cauterize the malady in three places: first, the root of the auricle, second, a small portion of its temple, and third, the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your heated instrument on the opposite side of the ill-placed hernia, for softening occurs only in the part that appears whole.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with a flame directly on the edge of the ear, then place a small amount over the temple, whose length corresponds to the length of your finger, and hold your hand over it until the quantity of the substance of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it is specifically from a knife, whose shape is presented in a flat manner.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as if you see it with your eyes, and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what we have mentioned does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it in four places: first on all the corners of their head; second, make a cautery at the middle point of the head, as we have said; and third, cauterize the base of the brain.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is most important; and then, treat with what you have prepared.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion done by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient hot drinks and pills in the beginning; the servants will rinse their mouths.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the patient's whole head and apply the plaster to their chest as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of those steps I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if they are healthy, it is good; otherwise, make three cauterizations to them in the last part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, he should ensure the thickest part of the skin is touched, then carefully apply the cautery as the procedure dictates.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the patient tolerates the pain, and the disease is in one place, then apply cautery to that middle area; but if greater aid is needed, cauterize both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Ensure that the inside is healed; and apply the cautery olive according to the shape as given above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand that you should proceed in the softening of the head with jerks and according to what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and apply cautery to that middle area of the head with a cautery, and cauterize all corners of the head, and cauterize over the last part of it, and apply three cauteries over the spinal bones of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of a stiffening of the body due to excessive humors and the pain is tolerable but intense, apply four cautery points on the spine of the back, then apply cautery inside until the sudden movement of the patient stops, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then take care that it heals properly; this is cautery with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic should not be cauterized, but only that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is important to purify the patient's brain at the beginning when they have fever and other treatments that we have mentioned in the previous section when the disease is severe and tolerates the delay of medication.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer warm broths and soft foods to them, for several days, to benefit from the nourishment of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of the head, and over any corns on the head that have been cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply cautery as follows, having paralyzed and relaxed the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and excessive phlegm, cauterize them with the cauteries we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholia, and the patient's body is humid, then give him a drink that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and make a decent incision on the circle (scalp) above it, and then pause to rest in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel calm, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply the remedy; it is more worthy to be used before sheep shearing.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that above the fire with gentle heat for a measured time, which causes it to suffer less when placed in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take the object in the middle part of the patient's head in the circle and loosen it so that it becomes chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week for a period of time, following his diet until he is cured; or, if you wish, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery, as I have described: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that soaked cloth along the edges or in the colors of pigeon droppings.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of water retention in the legs.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the beginning of water retention in the legs is declared through the signs that I have mentioned in the preceding section, it begins and causes the patient to drink a substance that purifies the head, and pays close attention to all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have them soak in a bath with herbs for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize with two irons over two temples if it is the beginning of water retention in both legs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water retention in one leg.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterizations should be on that long according to the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be wary of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further medication that is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to possess knowledge that is derived from arteries, amputation of those, and the prevention of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterization instruments, thereby producing a desired effect.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are frequent and through the veins and arteries which are in the external manifest part of the head, and it is determined that this is a superfluity of fluid membranes, then cauterize with a cautery as we have reported in the chapter about beginning to heat water in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle part of the head and two cauteries on the neck between two temples, and two cauteries on the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional need, then cauterize across the entire length of the eye's tail at the end of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	**On the Cauterization of Nose Putridity.**
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating the condition we described in the previous section and your treatment is ineffective, then prepare a mixture for the patient to drink for three nights; and shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized cautery or olive-sized cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply cautery with a claw-shaped instrument on both eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the claw-shaped instrument for cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening cautery of the eyelids for the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply cautery to that eyelid with a claw-shaped instrument; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply cautery to both eyebrows with a small instrument in the shape of two cauters, extending them from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhering.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn to scabs inside and press on the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn to scabs inside and press on the eye, cautery is performed in two ways: either by making a cut or using a medicated burning cautery.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you are using a fire cautery, order the patient to open their eyes wide, so that they look at things with both eyes, and if you need to, place a bandage on them to prevent any further damage while the hairs fall out.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are clean and prepared, place the patient's head on the bed, and then carefully inspect the soles of their feet, looking for a sign resembling a dead leaf, which is where the symptom usually begins.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a cold compress or a wet cloth on the sole.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply the hot cautery, which is shaped like this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize along the shaped area, little by little, in repeated passages, until the surface of the wound is completely healed, just as if it were covered with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of recovery is that you see the eyelid of the eye contract and the patient's hair stand on end at the site of the cautery on the sole.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then apply a poultice to the affected area until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that remedy until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery again on that entire area just as you did originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position, sealed, and the hair does not produce any odor.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with a burning medicine is what you order for the patient to remove the hair so that it does not grow back and is sealed; then make a cut in the shape of a fir leaf using a piece of cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a known soap and an active cause of one or the other, mix those good causes together, and make it into a paste so that it is not frozen; spread this from it on paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both wounds; leave the fragrant part soaked in egg white albumen, and the patient's head in the cold air.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then stop talking about the medicine and apply a small amount, but not too much, so that the patient does not feel the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire in it.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, when the patient no longer feels the bite of the medicine, cease its use and apply a cold compress to the affected area; then consider whether the eyelid is lifted as it should be after washing away constriction by fire or incision, for that is the sign of healing; if it does not return to the application of this medicine in the place where it was not absorbed, do not worry, for your operation will succeed and the wound will heal.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of adhesion is eradicated, and care for it with a definite ointment or other treatment until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to have great care that no part of the medicine falls out of the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened after a few days because of some cause related to the hairs in the eye, then continue your treatment on that place where the eyelid has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the method of making an extract from myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men vary in size and shape, and therefore your treatment must be adjusted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And this way of treatment should not be hidden from anyone who is studying this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula using the method we have described for these maladies and your treatment does not work, then know that you should cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place some instrument between their teeth so that they do not move or agitate their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a small piece of cloth soaked in honey or a mixture of feathers and dust on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then shape the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be curved, similar to the shape of a cane or a quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to get out this way, try it cautiously.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet he who is experienced is better at the time work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry that part.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from that part.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place over it the hot cautery, and with your hand protect the part from the heat of the cautery at the root of the nose, so that your hand or the illness is not disturbed, and apply the cautery to the grey parts of the nose and burn that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; leave it in place for three days, and then apply pressure to that area with a border and envelop it in a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it does not heal, apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and then scrape it as seems appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way to apply a cautery for a fistula, which some first described: enter the location of the fistula and burn it, then return to that small fissure from which it originated, and apply the amount of molten lead equal to a fingernail; hold your hand over it with good retention so as not to harm the patient because the molten lead does not reach the wound; cover the area where you place the cautery with alum or water, so that the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through a marvelous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a drain from the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterization of the hernial orifice.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Various occasions lead to the occurrence of fissures in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a knife according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the concavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully between those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully remove the bandage once it has healed.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of an uvula or in the palate or in the roots of teeth there is an abscess and it bursts, and it becomes ancient, and a fistula forms, and you treat it but do not allow healing, then you must ignite a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and insert that flame into the passage of the fistula, and with your hand guide the burning flame to its depth, doing this once or twice; and then care for it as we have said regarding treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the wound is incised and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and remove the corrupt bone as described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX:**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then place the patient's head in a suitable position, and shape the cautery so that it can be applied to the tooth. Then place your finger on the tooth and insert the burning cautery into it, holding it for a short time until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, which has been reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand and repeat the application of the cautery several times, as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which they should spit it out, as the decayed tooth will be secured, the softened gums will tighten, and the corrupted moisture will dry up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, one uses cautery on that area in two ways: either with a cattle horn cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a cattle horn involves taking the horn of a cow and piercing it in the fire, then holding the cautery over the affected tooth, wrapping the cloth around the tip, immersing it in hot water, and applying it to the aching tooth until it is numbed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or cloth in the wound on its side, place that over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization with fire only addresses the outer layer of the wound or the skin, and it should not be too harsh or rough, nor should the heat of the fire reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as needed, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools; do this several times as the pain may resurface the next day or later.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide with the help of the cautery, hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery where you have seen the extreme, as much as you can.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are filled with fluid and humors that are resistant to digestion by medicines, and you need to expel them slightly, then apply the cautery directly to their form, having two sharp ends so that the fire from the cautery can reach both sides. You should place the glowing end on one spot until it has reached the desired point, and then move to another spot as needed until the hernia is removed.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and then let it heal for three days, keeping a clean bandage on it until it has been completely healed by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or the point of the cautery is designed for its use.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of wounds and the constriction of veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled by congestion, it is necessary to evacuate that evil at the beginning with medicinal purgatives, and then cauterize that part where the pleura is affected.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to harm the pleura with the cautery or to inflame the patient's chest too much.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that or another cautery on the joint of the neck in the last spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of him is the same as the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that as mentioned above until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for pulmonary disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and pulmonary disease are caused by excessive moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and the condition is chronic, then cauterize in two places on the furcula (breastbone) at the spots where it curves upward; also, make another cautery in the middle of the foot between the big toe and the one next to it; and use the cautery as mentioned above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery may be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within these; and then carefully treat that with the remedies that are preceded so that it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that extent: at one time you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the throat, which is the chief aid's responsibility.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the chief aid's head is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not stop in the hour of its return, you should reduce its dislocation until it is to its usual place, and with a slight movement, it is also displaced as it ought to be, as we have witnessed; first, reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient lie on their back or side; and raise the head that was in the opening within the throat to the upper parts above using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the shape of the cauterization will be when using three cautery points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it is so subtle according to the amount of effort; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this rule, and that is the reason for the eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in a tranquil state, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then make this done, cauterizing over the muscle with a hot cautery or making pointed cuts with other cauterization tools, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is broken and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When stomach pain occurs with friction and moisture inside, causing the intestines to protrude, and if you continue treatment methods without considering, it will be seen that the illness is on its back, extending its hands and legs, and cauterize that part with three cauteries: one cautery leaving a mark on the foot about the size of a finger, and two cauteries on either side of the cost (rib) of the cautery, while maintaining the shape of a triangular cautery; stretch between those who are not aligned, as it will cause putrefaction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be punctured at the point that this cautery scares: and you know how much to puncture the stomach with a pointed cautery, and then cauterize these points; and then take care of the cure that has been preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of a Fetled Artery**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the artery arises from coldness or moisture or excessive windiness, and the ailment is treated as we have said, and you do not allow it to spread, then you should raise the malady over its base, and try three cauterizations with this form and this amount on the artery beneath the ribs; thus, he achieves the position of a reclining man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not let your fear guide the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of moisture adhering to the quantity of the nature of the cord is not properly adjusted, and if the illness stands on the patient's feet, or if it is not standing, then he should sit, whose parts have already spread out, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when it is subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn too much with the cautery, and fix your gaze on every part of the body so that all the body is numbed and reaches the intestines, for the cautery here is subtle; be aware of this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is in the flesh or in the sheath of the muscle, if it is in the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on great gravity and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the sheath of the muscle, the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is bent; then identify the location of the abscess, and apply the pointed cautery whose form was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with these cauteries until the entire wound is closed, so that it heals properly.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And likewise, take care for the healing of other abscesses until they are cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And use only the cautery described in medical texts, from which most of the illnesses you know are derived; however, on certain occasions, this may be daring for this operation, but we must always prioritize safety and do what is best.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cauterization techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin cut end of an aristological instrument and inserting it into the pleural cavity through a small opening, adjusting its thickness as needed.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse those in oil and heat them over the fire, and cauterize with a hot iron at the location between the continuation of the furcula (first rib) and the collarbone; use two small irons to guide, one slightly inclined downwards from the point where the beard joins, and two others inclined between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly towards the rear. Use another iron in the middle part of the foot; another on the stomach, and three more at the rear parts. Use an iron between the two shoulders, and two irons on each side of the foot, leaving the iron between the two shoulders for last.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And be sure that your hand does not touch the cautery, but in the open wound where the work is done.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	They also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauteries that resemble rays and ignite this, then place it in the space between the ribs, in order to reach that place and cure it completely, as we have said regarding the hernia.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	You should not be afraid of this piercing with cautery, as it often happens in the fissure place where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	It appears that the text you've provided does not contain meaningful content related to the previous lines, as "Capitol .xxx." seems to be an incomplete or irrelevant reference. The previous section discussed medical practices involving cautery and hernia treatment. If you have more context or additional sentences, I can assist with a more accurate translation.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Regarding the cauterization of the melse (melza, meaning "mucous membrane" or "mucus").
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the bowels with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your care, use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct; one is to make three or four punctures along the length of the bowel according to the pattern of the cautery marks on the fabric.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the same manner we have said in the fabric cautery completely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not apply your hand with the cautery; let the illness be on their backs.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two sides, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and raise the cord which is at the end of the bowel where it rests on the left side of the patient's illness.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, by which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, be such that cauterization is done according to the extent of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then properly insert the two weapons, on fire, into that space where they penetrate the spine from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and thus, four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery that has three weapons.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then care for the cauterizations so that they do not cause pain for too many days, as it is more effective than other remedies previously in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .XXXI. (This indicates the continuation of the medical treatise.)
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of dropsical conditions.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to dropsical conditions but directly to the affected part.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating a dropsical condition using the methods described in the previous section, and if your treatment does not resolve it, you should apply four cauterizations in the area surrounding the affected part, as well as one cauterization on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the groin, two cauterizations between the spine of the back, and one cauterization directly on the right side of the foot, and yet another cauterization on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause prolonged pain.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the hernia with cautery alone, but add two intentions to it, and it will be celebrated with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be according to the shape of that one used for the stomach, and it is that same one used for cauterizing the back, which is like an olive based on its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and other parts.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in cold water and become full of water, cauterize them on the top of the foot, between the big toe and the little finger, without pressing hard; then lift your hand and do not return it to its previous position, as the icy water may leak out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cautery according to this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the tip of the cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on the outside and the other on the inside of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then attend to those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: "Capitol" is likely a typographical error, as it is typically used for the beginning of a chapter in books, and the number system should be consistent with the rest of the text.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to inflammation and moisture that resolves the channels, it is the digestive and retentive virtue located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated using curative methods without causing further harm, sometimes the patient undergoes painful cautery to exhibit the virtue, then cauterizes a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, also uses circular cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of subtle embelics, or a subtile nail-like cautery; and cauterizes over a large alcatin on alozis, or uses two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excess moisture and illness tolerate it, then cauterize that on the penile region and intestines, firmly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure from which one does not stray.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv. (Note: The number xxxiv is Roman numerals for 34.)
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in nature, old hemorrhoids that are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they do not yield to the treatments mentioned in the previous section, then cauterize them with three cautery tools on the pus left in the small of the back, and another cautery over the navel from both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is observed that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned previously; also apply a cautery to the intestines, and another cautery to the anus with a claw cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and pay close attention until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	From the treatment of hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove hernias, you apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that flame into the hernia you have removed and keep your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too many, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then care for those with herbs until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not adhere to the treatment we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupted by unclean humidity, it is most worthy to attempt its healing with subtle means, and then slowly introduce the quantity of the depth of the fistula according to the aforementioned subtle attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intercepts the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupted bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be cautious in all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and all foreign matter has been removed from it, and it heals in this way for a long time, then you know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the foreign matter is not from inside the body, then you know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of its opening, or it falls from those causes of which there will be a remembrance in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, it is necessary to cauterize them, beginning with the most severe ulcer using a cautery instrument of which you have need for its healing.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should strongly cauterize the second one a little later, so that three cauterizations will follow, and thus there will be fewer subsequent ones.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease cannot retain urine, cauterize it in the area where the pus has formed, beginning at the opening of the urethra, and cauterize with a hot iron on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the pus; cauterize it with a hot iron in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the hot iron should be driven in according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The absence of a specific text means I cannot provide a translation for this section.)
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When fever and humidity are present, and for that reason conception is forbidden, the woman's menstruation becomes corrupted, and it takes longer to arouse them, causing pain due to their arrival; then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; or with two cauteries, one on each side, or a cautery in the shape of a claw.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors infiltrate the area around the ankle, and cause its swelling, and a sign of it is that the affected part is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is narrowed down to which boot it is in.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus with a circular cauterization, for you will have already tried to loosen the ring around the opening as it is turned, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the cautery mentioned above is also used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cautery irons.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain from all over the body, and be careful that it is sane.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL:
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the lower part of the body, caused by cold and moisture, the disease is treated with the water we have mentioned and do not give any other thing, and this is ancient, then you should reduce the disease from thick humors with putrid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and treat it with cautery.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the way of the cautery on that is according to two ways: either cautery with medicinal burners, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows according to two knowledgeable ways, of which one is to cauterize it in the gap of the patient's anus with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make those sufficiently deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And both the spaces between each cautery should be according to the thickness of what is being treated, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some times, cautery can be applied to the middle part of the ankle for it to be four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape precedes in the cauterization of the dislocated ankle, one that is circular and burns away the inflammation of all the tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in chronic cases when pain is attached to the ankle and not spread within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is spread within the thigh, then cauterize that as two cauterizations on the thigh over the place where you have turned the malady that causes the pain; and one cauterization on the shin bone four times a day from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cuticular, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the quantity of inflammation of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the disease causes the pain to radiate towards the feet, then apply a cautery here where you see it needs cauterization with three or four or more points if required for that part.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the disease causes pain to remain in the thigh, then apply a cutting cautery here where it is felt.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not end with cautery on nerves or great damage, and thereby to yourself cause more harm than the disease does to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen others of those who cauterize on the ankle and complete the cauterization, and a bed of fire inflated within that the growth achieved its foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then cause a strong acid solution of the belly, and thereby bring about death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously apply cautery to each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And certain wise men spoke of the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circular iron ring whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there should be another third; and the space between them should be equal to the width of a palm; and these circles should have two parts; and the length of these sides should be a palm or two palms, and make on the edge of the iron circles a proper incision in the shape of them.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and once it is paused over the part of water, place the patient on their side with the afflicted area above.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that part with three red hot cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that for three days; then bind up the wound with a poultice and keep the ulcer open for several days; and then tend to it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of looking at it, and because few of us have found those who look at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	One should apply the best cautery to him who suffers from it, and find out the right place for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	One should use cautery instead of medicines when, after making two circles with a perforated armature made of iron, you insert the guaffo (a hook or claw) into the door; let the length of the wall be such that its width is equal to two nuts or the size of those used.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part, they should be opened and left open, and they should hold themselves together according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the part where the patient feels pain in the side, and take some cold water, forming it into two circles, and gradually decrease its temperature with fire, keeping it for an hour, and allowing the patient to endure the burning and compression—for that burning sensation is as if it were from fire—until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the cold water from all parts of the affected area with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then apply this for three days and place your hand on the affected area until the swelling decreases, and repeat this for several days, and it will cure the pain; this is best in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then attend to that wound until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is widespread in the thigh or leg, make him lie down so that water can be poured into him as has been done with the other patient.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of making water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a mixture of alkali and cause no extinction from both parts, cut them and place in a new vessel from which the opening has been perforated by a small tool according to the quantity that goes into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And leave the base of the vessel in another vessel filled with fresh water, and then place over it the mixture of alkali and causes, alive water, two fingers deep, and after you have compressed them well, let the hot water from the mixture flow down into the cold water in the other vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkaline renewals, so that it becomes a very powerful sharp substance, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation uses fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And indeed, some of the medicines that are cauterized include those with a sharp and clean edge and cause a burning and pleasant sensation, thus they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Now let me relate a tale of an ancient man who performed an operation and provided cure for pain in the kidneys and sciatica, and marvel at how wonderful it was considered to be. He claimed that no other treatment was necessary as this one healed completely with a single application; for he would immerse the affected part in hot water and it would heal from then on.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It is also important to consider the freshness of the herbs, and if they are not available, take a fig leaf; twist them with some salt and place them on the water where the pain is located, be it in the kidney, the thigh, or the leg, and heat them.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours, or for as long as the illness requires relief from pressure.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse them in hot water, and when the body is relaxed, place the stone on the affected area, as the pain will cease and healing will occur.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that one should not use cautery with these remedies unless it is for the purpose of releasing congestion from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	It may already be said that when the small vein in the goat's foot is cauterized, it brings relief; and the cautery should be applied to it in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take a dried goat's vein and apply it to the inflamed area with hot coals, then place the wool on top and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite enters the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the "ox cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is felt in the back for various reasons, such as due to injury or impact, or from excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not apply to any other kind but this specific one caused by the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, in order to evacuate the malady, make pills that resemble them, which are placed on the side where the pain is felt, three lines according to its extent, and apply cautery on each line, depending on the quantity you see from the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the remedy.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial claw cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This malady should be watched closely in young children; the sign of its onset in children is that it causes tightness in their small joints, raising and limiting their movements.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it examines the last spinal bone of the back and the joints that already begin to overhang above the other spinal bones.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you observe this and wish to prevent it, cauterize it with a curved cautery in the following shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery across the entire span of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then carefully tend to the area as it heals, as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that a cautery is not applied to a swelling caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with warmth and the pain does not cease, then cautery may be employed.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is because you cauterize the proper evacuation in the flow of the joint of the foot with various cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take a olive-shaped cautery whose form is thus:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain increases within the toes or other joints and this persists often, then cauterize that over any toe with three or four cauteries from this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize accordingly and do not press too hard with the cautery against the skin, only focus on the specific area of the joint.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain persists within the toe and its surroundings, then administer the cautery as we have mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the muscles only and is called tetany, then make points along the course of the tendons as they twist, in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain persists in these areas, make points along the course of the tendons on each joint and on the pinched nerve of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain can also spread to joints or muscles, then apply a cautery to any affected areas on the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the illness without proper treatment and receipt of medicines, for if good treatment is followed and inflammation is removed with this cautery, God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLVI
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	**On Cauterization of Fractures**
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you need to break open the angles and expose the hernias beneath the bandage at the groin, this is how you begin: ensure that you instruct the patient to stop eating on that day and use gentle causes to prevent the gap from widening in their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue to massage the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their mind relaxed, so that the opening or appearance of the hernia or intestines may occur.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the intestines to their place, and gently attempt to open up the gap in the pelvic bone; mark the end of it, which will be similar to a half-circle in the upper openings of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery whose shape is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	it should be sharp and have thin edges.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then apply the cautery to that sign with your hand, holding the cautery upright, and insert it where you have achieved access to the bone of the thigh within the muscles; repeat this another time if you did not achieve it on the first attempt within the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the setting of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to injure that hernia and cause death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that if during cauterization you do not hold the bone, your operation will not be successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be sure that the cautery of children is subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the site of the cautery for three days, applying borders until the fire scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it as with other burns until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be made to lie on their back for 10 days until the site is sealed and the pain disappears.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that the patient should abstain from food according to the duration of their healing, which strengthens their belly, and that the intestine should not protrude due to effort in recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, after about 10 days, administer the medicine properly and keep them on rest for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should reduce his labor and intake of food and drink, and avoid strong voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing diligently, they will be made whole.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with the formation of a hole, and if it does not heal, cauterize the hernia with a pointed cautery according to its size, and drain the fluid that has accumulated from the intestines; and then apply the treatments as mentioned earlier, without compression.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And it has been said by some that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this method, as it is observed and tried.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is made for the hernia's enlargement on both sides, then another line above it; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and better done.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in various members arises from a twist or blow and persists for a long time without yielding to medical treatment, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the type of cautery should be according to the size and depth of the member, and its strength and position, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, be satisfied; otherwise, repeat the cauterization; for usually those pains are punctures in members closest to that member, so you must succeed with cauterization within the time of illness.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes need cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you wish to cauterize this, consider whether the leprosy is severe and if it responds to treatment as described in the previous division, nor does it spread or remain, but be wary of the illness that the corruption encompasses the whole body and all its parts; then cauterize that part on top of the head with a cautery: at the middle point of the head, and at the second part underneath, you can treat the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, over the nape or serving it.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, with your hand on the cautery, slightly press it against the bone where it causes a slight impression, and dislodge the scales, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is relieved; and cauterize over the flesh as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then cover it with cauterization using those cauteries we have mentioned before; cauterize on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each eye socket, two cauteries on both sides of the spine at the nape, five cauteries on the spine, one on either side near the coccyx, one over the coccyx, and two on each ankle, one on each toe, and two on each thigh and muscle; cauterize all the joints of the hands and feet, and on every talon of their feet, and around the fissures of their bodies.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves on the sole that you do not hurt those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its benefit and the more effective it is; also know that illness does not reside in the cautery, as it does in its parts, for this reason the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And consider that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned concerning the kinds of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is paralyzed or numb and not healed through medicines, oils, and poultices, then you cauterize that paralyzed member with cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your hot cautery enter slightly into the wound of the cord.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply that remedy until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes, cautery is applied to some parts which cause pain extending to the limbs and feet, and the spinal columns, and as a result, one can see the condition of the nerves that affect that member, and the pain subsides.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	One must not attempt this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .XLVIII (or .xlix)
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of ulcerations that are festering.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the wound is old and does not heal with any of the common medicines, then apply a cautery to it with a pointed instrument according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord until the white and color of the wound are restored, and the color of the wound is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a mixture of flour from beans and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnicagosa (arnica), or pigeon's blood or deer's blood, each one separately and all mixed together, and apply a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It appears that the text you provided is incomplete or lacks context for a clear translation. The phrase "Capitol .l." does not form a complete sentence or concept on its own. If this is part of a larger medical treatise, providing more context or the preceding lines would be helpful for an accurate translation.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	**Cauterization of Cramps:**
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to eat away at a limb, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it revolves.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the scholars say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the affected area; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this happening a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is instead more effective to cauterize it around the circumference of the limb in a circular manner, as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess takes too long to heal, this may be due to its own excess or the state of the illness, as it is old and with little blood flow, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around its circumference with multiple small punctate cauterizations; and then remove that, as it will slow down its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place it in the middle point of the prepared area until the wire penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied at that point which is most affected, in order to relieve the body of the arm; and then take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption of the member, which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a location which requires cautery with fire, then heat cautery clamps, both small and large, as appropriate for the place where the corrosion is located.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply the cautery from every side until you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then bind it for three days, and place your hand on the cauterized areas every third day with a mixture of oil until all scars are completely eliminated and all corruption removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then cure it with a poultice of fresh meat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	It may be three days before the flesh grows healthy and free from corruption, which is good; if not, apply the cautery again over what breaks in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And sometimes it is treated with sharp medicine, for that is half the work of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire is more suitable for older patients.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already described the cure for him using sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will need from him when he is ready.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of wounds and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Occasions where there are severe, ruptured wounds in the parts of the foot affected by malady, which is called a claw, and these wounds cause great pain; cauterization on such areas is performed in two ways, either with fire or with water-driven cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The fire cautery is done by igniting the cautery tool similar to a tourniquet's pain, made of iron according to the amount contained in the wound from start to finish, and it should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply that fire to the joint, and revolve your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that there for three days until it begins to throb.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply that compress, made of wild malvas (mallow) mixed with salt, over the affected area for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a poultice of generative flesh (or healing ointment) until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not cured, and outbreaks again on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must administer to those cauterizations with water, and take a small pipe of earth or iron or a pen-shaped instrument, and apply that over the joint; then immerse the tip of the pipe in little water, and place your hand, and revolve it with compression from your hand entirely, and continually turn the edge of the pipe along the root of the joint, and you will see the water being drawn out towards the root of the joint. And wait for the patient to bear the slight sting of the water for an hour, then remove that, because the joint will be freed from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they do to those who have them, approaching another who comes over all of theirs that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And they also take care of those pus that the roots of the clots have been eradicated with heat, which the flesh ingests.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or by fever from a contaminating cause, or by any other similar reason, you should know that you cauterize it with four cauterizing irons or with two on each spine of the back, between each spine placing one iron; and also cauterize on the patient's feet, and over their stomach, using olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him rests and hastens the healing of the ill health that afflicts.
Capitol .lv.	It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section, "Capitol .lv.", but without the actual content or context of what is being referred to. In medieval texts, ".lv." could indicate the fifth chapter (in Latin, "capitulum" often refers to a chapter). However, without the preceding text, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation or interpretation.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cautery for white accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white spots appear on the body and form pustules consisting of corrupt, thick matter, begin by treating them at their onset with a subtle cautery or a heated iron, the tip of which is extended over the entire fistula; or with a long, thin blade; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	In other cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner; they are not broken, and the excess matter is expelled, healing those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it may also be necessary to perform an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of flux of blood from a wound by incision of the archer.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Wounds caused by arrows that have been cut and infected, or when there is an opening due to the incision of a hernia or cautery on a member, then it appears similar, and it is difficult to contain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you should use your hand over the wound of the arrow, and press down on it, tighten those parts seen as open until the flow of blood stops, so that it does not occur again.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive hot cauteries on the fire, a few large ones and many small ones, and blow on them until they become ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or large one according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, over which you have squeezed the pus as mentioned, and cauterize it until it is incised and that blood is stopped.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you apply pressure and remove the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do this again until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to irritate the nerve here, which may bring about other evils for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its ends are cut off, the extremities are burnt and the bleeding is restricted; or by binding it tightly with string or ligature, or pausing over it medicines whose virtue restricts the blood flow; and they should be tightened on a pillow or in a compression bandage.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a decent restriction of it with bandages or by the position of burning causes and similar ones, does not bring relief but only aggravates it.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done for anyone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open at the indicated site on the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within that the flow of the plague is stopped; and regarding the hardness, it should not be resisted; and wash it with freezing cold water until the vein is frozen and thickened; and consider what cautery or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second step.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, blisters, phlebotomy, plaies, and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all manner of illness where fire cautery is appropriate and medicinal fires are useful, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them according to the forms of cautery; and I have ordered the chapters on the treatment of conditions from the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, we will proceed in this manner so that those who seek knowledge here find relief, as much as possible, on the subject of their queries.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, know, children, that in this chapter, the topic is fearsome, as it was first discussed in the chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is important to exercise great caution, in the procedure discussed in this chapter, which involves drawing blood from the veins or making incisions into the abscesses, or draining pus, or cleansing wounds, or extracting arrows, or beginning treatments for stones—and all similar things—you must consider the following:
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall on you who are in a state of health, for sometimes you must be aware of the ways of men, as well as the signs of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is from them that you will learn about their illnesses and they must be gently treated, for the urgency of their illness, and the longevity of their disease, and the severity of the illness itself, which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is of these that one gives to you advice and says, "Hope for health," and their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than your trust, and your greed; and do not presume any cause regarding it, but only through certain knowledge that verifies what is happening to you, and to which a laudable success has occurred.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And in the treatment of all your illnesses, use prognosis and indication of that which is turned to health, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and do not let you stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this distinguished chapter into sections according to the preceding chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in whatever you inquire about and need regarding this.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness often manifests in children during teething and when the blackness enters the child's head, it causes pain.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And in some cases, it must be perceived for an obscure cause that is unclear.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This disease may also be seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work done on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that the head of a child, whose body was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified so that he could not lay down on his side because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until fire death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the flesh and bone or it is added beneath the bones on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that one, if the moisture is between the flesh and bone and the abscess is small, then you need to make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its width, and the length of the fissure should be two fingers deep so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess becomes larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity leaves the bone, a sign of it is that you observe the open seams on the head from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press with your hand at those openings, but it should not be something you conceal.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut into the middle part of the head, make three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract the incision to remove all humidity; tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters; drill into the wound from above with a needle and oil within five days, and then open it up and treat the abscess with ointment and compresses, and hold the head in an equal position; feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another incision technique which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of water, sometimes it appears at the back of the head or in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the repletion of water, and do it as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and pus from the infection and stop the patient's suffering through the flow of blood in the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries which are close to auricles, they are called hilecesses.
Capitol segon.	**Second Chapter.**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an occurrence of sudden or severe pain in the ears or feet, and it is an ancient condition, and medical treatments do not provide relief, then the final cure lies in the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you wish to incise those parts where the disease has raised its head, first rub the place with coarse cloth to expose the arterioles, and then tighten the collar of the diseased part with a piece of cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each one above the places that are appropriately elevated, and they remain concealed in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then, with a gentle pull, you should stretch the arteria, and incise each one with the blade where the cut reaches the bone, and this is done according to the direction of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the blade between the arteria and cut it at the points of incision on its sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be such that, when a vein is incised, the blood flow stops immediately, preventing excessive bleeding.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully make an incision and insert into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you get from the wound is a quantity of blood one unit, and strong leeching should not be done more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the severity of the illness and the depth of the arrow in it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of decay, you should incise it so that it does not develop gangrene cautiously.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From extraction of the arthritics which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migraine occurs due to the humidity of the air and the quality of the tears in the temples, or an old headache that is similar to these, and it does not respond to medical treatments as described above, we have found relief in these ailments by extracting the arthritics from the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of surgery and extraction of those is to address the pain that originates in the temples; understand the arthritics appearing in the temple where they are indicated by your finger, and it is hidden from most people due to its severity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, tighten the collar of the ailment with some cloth; then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arthritics appear to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge in which this form is:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the cord as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and you open it where it is located and extract the foreign body with your fingers while uncovering that of the tunic which remains there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, you wrap it at the extremity of the finger and cut a single part according to the amount by which its extremities are elongated and contracted, and thus prevent the flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not cease to flow from them.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then, empty the vein of blood within three beats.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the arrow is large, you cover it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with strings, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and cause the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it once they are incised, and hold in place that piece of work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a condition of heat, as cauterization is one of those causes that help to eliminate moisture; thus, it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the arteries that you have removed from their original position, placing them pause over it properly prepared, and apply to them a cure with dry medicines that make the flesh and the bones heal within a short time.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another complication arises in the form of bleeding from the artery, then hold yourself to restrict that blood, or use a cauterization, or whatever you place at the site of the wound, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present to you, then hold your tongue over the area until the swelling is reduced, and strike the place with water of great coldness until the pain ceases, and apply pressure as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is put in place of extraction from the arrow, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have already cleaned the two wounds, and applying some heat, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two places, so that what is between the extremities of it can be elongated, as they are not consolidated by all this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both blades is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But it may be that if the single blade has greater sharpness than two, it is better, because if it is very sharp, it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of fire is held within it and the flesh is slightly separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and is most delicate.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two joints is the amount of thickness of that said.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic heartburn in the intestines.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is acidic heartburn, and it is the intestines of those veins that are above the skull, and no medical cause for its cure corresponds to this, and the patient's face turns red and he feels a strange sensation in his forehead as if it were a walking of ants, and the feet of that person are exhausted, wet so that their skin becomes loose, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears, the old remedies for the treatment of these conditions in this operation, I will mention this cure as follows.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on their forehead, and then inscribe three incisions equally distant along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two parts: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be mindful of the incision of the arteries which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three parts, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the scalpel between the two sharp ends, which is the shape of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is part of the temples within the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the phallus, and then make a midline incision within the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strike with this scalpel into the first incision, or rather, use another instrument called a scissor, which has one sharp and one blunt side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the cord, and the blunt side against the bone, and use it within to reach the midline fissure, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appear of the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood decreases, press the places of the frozen parts of the sanction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a certain amount of warm cloth soaked in wine and oil, and make sure it does not cause any further infection.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, loosen the bandages and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then treat it with basilicum oil or rose oil and other herbs until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	It appears that there might be a missing or incomplete sentence here. The term "Capitol" could refer to several things depending on the context, such as a place name or a specific medical term, but without surrounding text, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation or interpretation. If you can provide more context or additional lines from the treatise, I'd be happy to assist further.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of bleeding from cathartic drugs and from the downward flow of fluids from parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When a sudden cathartic effect occurs and continues, it weakens the patient's veins, depleting their strength, and their eyelids become ulcerated along with their facial hair. In the region of the head, there is intense pain and the subsequent extrusion of materials, and at this point, you know that these symptoms are caused by matters and cathartics emanating from veins located inside the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: instruct the patient to clean their forehead, then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, slightly towards the left temple compared to the right (beginning with the temporal fissure on the left side and extending it into the bone), and extract the blood from the temples which are more beneficial after chewing.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the pus with a sponge or clean cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the wound with fresh, clean bandages.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then sprinkle on them a dust mixed with wine and oil, so that it does not contract gangrene dangerously.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the gangrene has already decreased, then you know that the infection starts in the bone within it, and accordingly, treat it with a drying remedy that makes the flesh healthy again, just as if you were to mix two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, make a paste from them, and apply it to these sores on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what cats in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that cats in the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral or a similar rock, such as iron or copper, or it is from a plant, like rye or fava beans, or it is a fluid-related cause, such as water and wine mixed, or any animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a cat's claw or any other similar cause affects the ear, and the ear is painful and swelled, if the pain is intense, it sometimes discharges into some cause of polluted oil or pus, then carefully extract the foreign body and make the condition suitable to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then apply some soft cloth or wool to the ear canal and gently pull the ear away from the affected area, as heat and moisture are often effective against such causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not removed, then use the instrument called a delicate epichirurgical gesture to extract it.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is removed with the gesture, fine; if not, then carefully extract it using an instrument with a slight double fold.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and close around the tube with softened wax and oil so that only the tube opens.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then, with a strong attraction, extract the foreign body that we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot metal or a specially crafted instrument with which the stones are gently extracted, place it at the end of the ray, and then wrap it around that part neatly and securely.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal with ease and extract the ear from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten regarding all the causes that we have described, then gently tie off that which causes gangrene or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you begin by making incisions in the vein affected by the gout and extract the blood according to the virtue of its quantity, then make a cease between your fingers and convert the flap back to its original position, and make a small incision at the base of the flap where the gouty matter has been previously pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture is of a lunar shape that reaches the bone, and the bone is exposed, stop it with appropriate instruments if you can; then quickly treat the fracture while it is still fresh and cure it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the swollen and inflamed fats, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not adhere to your eye's recommendation, then take some gentle, subtle suction according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by the patient's breath, hold it in heavy weights, or extract it using forceps or any such instrument, because this complicates its removal.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	If water has entered the ear, which is the cause of the ailment leading to sneezing, and it fills the ear canal with some old wax, then press on that ear in which the water is, and if it is expelled through this pressure, it is good; otherwise, take a few small stones or beans according to their size, heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump on one foot, pressing with the other foot on the stone or bean located inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already water has been drawn out thusly, taking paper or cloth, place one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity towards the fire until the most part of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then take another cloth and do this many times until all the water is drawn out, and tear that from the tube as it is said of the water drawing stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body entering that ear, if it is small, it can be removed with the same method and similar care as we have said in division; but if it is of great size which causes appearance at the sense of the wound, then administer the extraction of it by hand and scissors, and the cause of it is more lightly considered from all other causes that catch in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat that with the water as we have said in division and in the treatment of distills and do not agree with your care, then watch that you protect the ear from the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then extract them by delicate gestures or means, but if no cause appears, take a tube from narrow at one end and wide at the other, the form of which is like this.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the subtil extreme into the ear according to the quantity of suffering from the malady; and then suck it with a strong suction, making motions as you do so, until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey to the extent required, then cover and close the tube with wax as we have said; administer the distillers which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your flow be the one that pours medicinal oils into the ear, with this instrument, the form of which is like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make a small, straight incision in silver or bronze, leaving a narrow opening, and apply pressure on it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore, it is used to fill the cavity of the hernia here, which is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the instrument neatly, then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing or any herbal juice, or whatever you prefer from these medicines into the canula — in the earlobe — then insert the ray under the skin and squeeze with your hand to create pressure until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels relief within.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the earlobe should already be scorched with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are distilling in the ear is not too harsh, because the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Capital VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear inflammation.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, children's bellies can become inflamed due to their parents' undiagnosed or untreated ear infections, which can also affect adults. This inflammation can occur in the soft tissue of the ear or sometimes outside the ear canal.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And those that occur in the soft tissue, which do not comprehend (understand) the cause, are the most difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where you can identify the cause, take the affected ear away from the heat and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you then observe an apparent bulge, open it gently with a delicate spatula, the form of which is as follows:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the edge of it where the width is required, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the blade is of two lengths sharp so as not to harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the operation is for a bone grown in the ear or in the flesh, then you make those delicate cuts and incisions with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the operation is on the edge of the ear, then take a fine razor and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have sensed an operation that the patient finds easy due to the urgency, in order to relieve pressure, exert force on it easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the wound that you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some and immerse it in water, sprinkle over it every third day, and use it. If the ear has already been bandaged, then be careful not to pour out the liquid and replace it with other liquid that you wrap in cloth that is made of oil, as long as the abscess cautiously gives way; and take care of it so that it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If a flux of blood occurs, immerse the exposed or drape in warm water, place it on the wound, and use other remedies that restrict the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the distillation treatment.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	**On the treatment of athezel affecting the eyelids.**
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezel that affects the eyelids of the eyes sometimes becomes moist, other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have these herbs or garlic, and extract the juice from them, and then place it over the affected areas, pressing gently.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain accompanied by a blood flux occurs, then you should cauterize these with a fine, sharp cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to make incisions and cuts observed, returning when there is any cause for their reopening; and when cauterized with fire, those cuts are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	**Chapter IX**
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	**Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.**
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Observed motes or growths on the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that resembles a severe condition in its strength and hardness, hence it is called grandiose.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is characterized by the addition of a thick humidity on both the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them considers whether, when the growth is proceeding from the eyelid and is severe throughout, the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open that narrow fissure according to its extent, and carefully extract it from every part until it is completely removed, and then suspend it and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the beginning of the hernia is not clearly visible, but it is only felt upon careful incision into the eyelid, then this should not be noted for any particular cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the hernia is large, then you should adjust it with sutures; and tend to that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer greatly from that place as the hernia's own healing restores and covers it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the size is decreasing within the eyelid, you should expose the surface within, then raise the eyelid and suspend the hernia with a weight, other than what you usually use for the incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid itself is elongated through the incision, this should not be noted for any particular cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with liquid until it heals.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X**
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of an acute condition on the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Acute inflammation is caused by the condition affecting the upper eyelid's tunic, and it tends to occur more frequently in children, leading to painful eyes and sometimes causing cataracts; and due to this, they cannot bear the brightness of the sun, as tears accumulate at these eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you must keep those eyes covered over their faces all the time, and over their eyes rest the eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and the imminent threat of accumulation is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acuteness within those eyes.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in some manner of operation, if the patient's disease rests on their thigh, then drape cloth over them and make it warm, and form it into a circle according to the quantity that contains an arthron from every part, and place that over this one, and press with your hands all around for so that an additional amount is added in the middle of the circle, and finish in the middle of that moistened tissue by cutting incidentally through the fissure per its width, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place the needle in the opening until you reach the hernia, for in the most delicate positions, hernia is extracted through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers and pulled them out from the parts outside, and turn with your right and left hand until they are completely extracted.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to press on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the wrong place and cause damage to it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If the artery does not appear open at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a small piece of facilitating material while it processes the artery; and then extract that as we have said; and place cloths from it in water and wine and press them over the area and apply those as powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some put salt and press it into the cavity of the fissure so that what is removed from that moisture is drawn out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it so that it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an accident occurs at the posthemic location with a cautery, then care for it using plaster until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Regarding the tactile examination of the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eye are affected by the growth of natural hairs, which become hardened and cause discomfort, these lead to various diseases of the eye, with frequent tears, softening of the eyelids, and pain within, such that it causes the destruction of the eye, known as 'tactinir of the eye', and its cure is in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicines, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or through tubes, as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you should place the focus of the disease in the eye; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, you are successful; but if not, insert a needle into that area where the thread attaches to the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the thread onto the lid, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are, and pull the thread away from its attachment on the eyelid, and turn it towards the inside.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then carefully cut open the space between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with a sharp instrument so that they do not interfere; remove the foreign body and place the eyelid gently using small cotton or cloth, and press firmly on the eyelid as if holding a leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the shape may vary depending on the amount of swelling in the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those with a greater amount of swelling will require a deeper incision.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then cut with the scalpel along both lines that you have noted, starting from the lacrimal nerve on the outer side towards the inner corner of the eye.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as a coin's edge.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then apply the onion to one of the angles of the wound, clean it thoroughly, and secure the two edges with glue or fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, and let what is superfluous of the glue adhere to the two eyebrows for some hidden causes, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the stitches of the wound after three or four days, and treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of humors; but more stitches are better. And so I tell you the ancient practices of the taxanirs.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, always consider the patient's condition, and it is good practice, and there should be no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to measure it, and that is to observe the shape on the eyelid, like a plum, and then lift the eyelid with three incisions, separating and bringing them together according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, having the incisions, and this is not similar, then take a needle with thread and insert one in the middle of the shape, and then insert the other two near the lacrimal glands, the first closer to the larger one, and the second closer to the smaller one, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal, and then with your hand in the same elevation as before, lift all the eyelid as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and heal that which is clean.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs after your incision or opening, fill it with wax similar to the abscess, and treat it with fire.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, it is necessary for the eyelid that its hairs are changed, then use what we have mentioned about incision; more sutures are more artificial in some parts.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cut with scissors is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure within as I have mentioned; then make two scissor cuts or two thin blades of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width corresponds to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the ends of each piece, where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Now add each one with subtlety over what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and tighten the scissor cuts of each piece with a strong grip, leaving it for a few days; for the thread by the tightness will die and be rejected, and it will fall off once the body absorbs it on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and return to treat the illness until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two cans that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About the elevation of painful hairs in the affected area with an agule when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard, and prickly in the affected area, then the operation on them involves taking a fine needle and pricking at those precise points with a gentle touch, and adjusting the ends of them carefully and precisely.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be about the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then, promptly, tie another delicate thread around it briefly, and turn the extremes of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then, position the patient's head in the small of their back, close to the sun, so that your work is evident, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then, insert the needle into the root of the tight hair, using the necessary skill, and cause it to penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract that from its natural place.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then, pull the hair from its root and insert that into an alley, and be it one or two or three hairs, no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then gently pull your hand over that space where the skin is pushed aside or stuck to the eyelid or the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the eyelid is not stuck to the skin but there is still pain, pull the eyelid gently towards the direction of the wound where it was previously stuck.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And examine the wound carefully, as you pull the eyelid and the skin away from it, making sure to remove any and all debris in the wound, and leave the closure for two or three days so that the skin attaches firmly to its place and a new layer of healthy flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is more damaged and you need to replace it, take a longer strand of natural hair, elevate it to that space, or leave it until it grows long enough to fill the gap, then gently lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you notice a condition on the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid, either to the right or left, due to poor healing from an infection, incision, or cauterization, and it is called "leporina" (from rabbit-like). This condition, whether natural or accidental, occurs due to the scarring from infections, incisions, or cauterization, or resembling their malfunctions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of operation is that you open up and separate the scar tissue, and place a pad between the edges, and hold them together with a piece of cloth until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you should not use healing methods from the causes that cause drying and constriction, for if you do this, it will lead to a worse condition than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use those of causes that mollify thus as fenumegrec, and soak in the water in which the seeds are high and ground from them, or vinegar, which is liquefied with any of the oils, and immerse the affected area in it, and treat it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your healing is that you perforate with whatever tool is not solid according to the shape that you see at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but a correction of deviated bones that do not return to the form of the place according to what you see before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of deviated bones in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation which is found on the eyelid, properly called alkalation, is either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental inflammation can be caused by plague, or incisions, or cauterization, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread, fix one end in the flesh, and pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh apart with the needle and cut with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so return the eyelid to its original shape as much as possible; if it does not close well, take a thread and tie it in the shape of a slit, and with this convert the eyelid, making two slits on the inside edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two slits at the two angles of the incision, which you have made where they meet, form an angle that, when brought together, forms a figure of their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letters: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then close the flesh with the amount needed so that it covers the space left behind, which is what we call the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with woolen thread; and afterward, treat those with what we have mentioned regarding soothing medicines and blisters so that healing occurs.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if further elevation is needed through slits, sutures, or cauterization, then ensure that you make the incisions flat against the hairs of the eyelid as mentioned before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the water between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the continuation of the discourse on the treatment of high fever when it is intense or subsiding, which should be the course of action, according to how the fever is prepared in the form of alta (possibly referring to a specific medical procedure or state), and that varies in diverse ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare various methods by which it is possible for him to restore the figure to its natural state, or close to it, and treat that illness according to what suits him in terms of the operation and instruments in the best condition.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, it solidifies the eyelid from above with the white of the eye, restricting the ease of movement and its natural functions, so it is necessary to insert the tip of your finger beneath the eyelid and raise or extend it away from the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then, with a delicate spatula, incise the adhesion, not sharply from the cuts, rather bluntly a little so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not damage the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should remove that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid can return to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then, place the eye in salt water with which you wash it; or distill sun-heated steam dissolved in water into it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a cool compress, place a woolen cloth soaked in alum on the eye, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the knowledge of the structure of the eye and the prominence of the carnal tissue of the lachrymal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eye has two manners of being, either it is nervous, resembling a delicate, hard glass, or it is non-nervous, resembling white, frozen moisture, which when pierced, is forcibly removed from its place and the point does not stay in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species begin with the major lachrymal gland, as it gradually covers the sight and blocks light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of operating in the incision of the hernia is that the patient holds their breath, then opens the hernial orifice, raises the upper eyelid with one hand, and with the other catches the edge of the hernia with a gentle traction, and draws it out little by little.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the edge of the hernia using a horsehair, goat hair, cow hair, or similar, and gradually double the end of the needle, placing it in the middle of the nail, then penetrate the needle through the nail, tieing it with thread; extend it little by little from above, and excise the piece of skin around the edge of the nail that is covering the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you also excise the hair within the hernia's opening.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you make an incision in the membrane at the root of the tear duct using a thin spatula or small scissors, and remove the natural flesh of the tear duct so that making the incision does not cause continuous tearing.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the ungual (nail) is extended or attached to the skin, as we have said, and then it should be carefully removed with a sharp instrument of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the instrument do not touch the thin skin (tunica cornea), lest it break and the pupil be pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, apply a little salt or a fine mixture of herbs to the wound and leave it for another day; then take care that everything is covered until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it deeply embedded in the finger, then you should look for other treatments for this type of nail, which is healed with medications and restored as if it were divided.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to cut it (the nail), then open the wound of the patient and take a thin instrument with a sharp point according to this form:
am subtilitat.	With caution.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is solidified and infected and penetrates into that wound, then it will exude from your body in the form of a strong foul odor or a putrid rogue smell or a salty discharge, and you should apply a poultice to it within the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until all of it that is infected is removed, otherwise, take care with a cautery on the odor, for if you leave it, the infection will spread, and you should begin to treat the beginning of the infection until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the wound causing great pain, should be suspended immediately; then incise it from that one side, and do not close the incision so that tears do not flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then gently drain the tear duct until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and that which is born from hardened flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is born corrupt flesh that becomes inflamed and over-extended, covering or drawing near to the pupil, and pressing strongly upon the eyelids, so that it cuts off the sight, as if from a bulwark.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	However, the operation on it is that the malady stops its head in the small place; then open the eye of that one and collect all that flesh with scissors as appropriate, or with forceps or baskets; and then make an incision into the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and take care not to lacerate the wound which you must preserve intact for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision sharp with which you cut these or scoop out the pus that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small forceps with which it is collected carefully according to the shape that comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the cavity with salt triped, or distil in it a powder of herbs similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a clean cloth until it is assured from infection cautiously.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you find any cause of inflammation and it is infected with severe pain, and you fear infection cautiously, leave the wound and treat that infection with what gives relief to that inflammation, and then repeat the operation on it until it heals, and make similar incisions in the flesh that occurred in this particular wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	You can, however, cover all treatment of the severe wound by either natural or accidental means, using iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of wisdom in the skull.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Wisdom arrives in the form of pain that is hard and stubborn within the skull, preventing any attempt to treat it, and the skull remains closed for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the skull in which wisdom resides is strong and free from any other illness but wisdom; then you should gather that wisdom.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and then suspend those veins with a thin thread or two, according to your discretion; and let this thread have a subtle double effect as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads gently intertwined in the body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then, the veins, being squeezed by delicate forces and in a delicate manner, you must immediately extract the blood from them so that you can see if the veins have been revived from the hue and are circulating again.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to squeeze the blood out at the ends of the spatula; if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, and you are strong in your operation, only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, you will distill the hot or cold salt into the blood to corrode anything that has been revived from the wound.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of this at once, then apply a compress to everything that alleviates the patient's pain, and leave it for several days until the pain has subsided and there is no risk of an abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the process according to the method that best suits its cure.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the way of the forks:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of raised noses.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating a raised nose with cautery or sharp medicine, as is often done when it has been previously inflamed and not cured, then do not close it in the patient but rather make incisions over the abscess to drain the pus within, until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you should clean it with an instrument that has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an acure head, and it should be done immediately, and the head made round so as to grasp which part is punctured by the point of a limet or alkali by subtle puncturing (just as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done at certain times, and then restore the place with astringent and drying causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh and the body is separated from the unhealthy part for forty days, and it is not renewed or inflamed, and no accidents occur to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not in the above condition, but the fissure should be reduced to the shape of the nose, then according to this manner: and it is that you expose according to the bone by sharp chiseling or medical treatment, and when the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it first extended within the extremity in this way as often as necessary.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, and this is the position of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and rotate your hand to the side so that it penetrates all the bone, and feel the pain as you press, as if something is coming out from within when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that have been prepared accordingly.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh is no longer inflamed and the area is hardened, the matter that was discharged from the openings returns to the inside, thus it is less severe on the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the hernia's protrusion.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and does not occur in a painful or uncomfortable manner, then you should relax the patient, and as you continue to monitor it, make cuts on the neck for drainage and use good sucking; and afterwards apply a dressing over the hernia made of catgut, aloe, and linseed, and tighten the bandage over the hernia with motes (probably small particles or materials).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the motes (or particles) is to take sheets of lion's fur, each sheet cut into four pieces, and make them into those motes.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then arrange those motes one over the other according to the amount of hernia that requires it.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And tighten those over the hernia with a firm, strong cloth; repeat the use of suction through the scars; and then remove the ventosas (or suction cups) and leave the hernia tight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during this time the ligament softens, then it must be bound very tightly.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And at night and during the day, keep the ligament restrained as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, repeat the application of poultices, compresses, and vents until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the tunica uvaria's eminence.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the tunica uvaria and it becomes prominent, and you proceed to remove the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, shaping them in the form of a man, and you want to make an incision, then the operation on this part should be as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uvula starting from below and passing through its upper part, and then insert another needle through which is passed a double thread from the lacrimal part; thus penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position. Then make an incision in the place where the double thread is, and lift that portion of the uvula along the course of the needle, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it over the damp wool soaked in a mixture of honey and leather, and let it rest until the thread falls off on its own.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that provides comfort until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, from the very beginning, gather around the wound a circular bandage with great tension, and then pierce it gently with a thin spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, allowing the albumin humidity to escape, and lower the bandage and adjust it little by little.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of eyes.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called alcopati is not at all a healthy condition that resembles water flowing down and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of operation is as follows: you cease the disease by targeting the affected area and right away, take hold of the patient's head in your two hands from either side, and pay close attention to where the health begins to leave the parts below, then tighten it so that it does not descend, stop the flow of blood, and observe. The disease source is thus revealed to him who observes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downward, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the flow of the health is not stopped as we have mentioned, then seize the disease between your hands and take a subtle cut there, and place it over the panniculas that surround a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea on the crown (at the site desired), until the health is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is forgotten, you distill the fragrant water that you have mixed with honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured as the other causes are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from the chest.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in division and which ones are suitable for piercing, declaring that they should be chosen according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you understand that you should sever the patient's pain between your hands on a couch and bind their chest tightly with a bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then gently press near the edge of their eyelid with your left hand if the water is on the left side, or with your right hand if the water is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand and apply it with pressure if the water is on the left side, or your left hand if the water is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then hold the tip of the thumb near the edge of the eyelid, for its thickness against the white of the eye near the inner corner, and gently pull the thumb towards you while rotating your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then press into the eyelid, feeling that the thumb has already penetrated the eyelid due to the pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it should be noted that the measurement of the path of the thumb to the corner of the eye corresponds to the space from the pupil to the edge of the black circle, which is the crown of the eyelid; so you will see the pupil through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then apply magic to the place where the water is, and you throw it down a few times, and thus as the water descends, the disease over which his sight falls, will be affected by the magic in its place.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you should rest again before applying the magic a second time.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has risen and does not descend, then carefully extract the magic and slowly turn your hand, and dissolve a little of clear salt gem into the water inside, and wash the affected area with this liquid; and then place outside the afflicted part, or stop it, or wrap it in wool infused with rose oil and egg white and bind it with the water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But for us and those of our time, it is better to use something other than egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your knowledge in the use of the instrument into the wound due to its hardness - which is one of the men whose wound is hard to treat -, then take the spatula, which is named 'alberid', the form of which is as follows:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so pierce that joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and it is only after you have made a subtle opening with your knowledge.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the knowledge as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's comfortable sleep in a dark room where they sleep on their back at home, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And hold in the nature of it so that its nature is calm, and do not twist their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And arrange the ligature according to its position within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then return it to that place in that dark way, examine the free sight, and make some judgments, and then return the ligature within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover this during the hour of treatment or, if necessary, apply infusion later.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You should know that this is done because the water can slightly lift and violently tear due to its great strength and force.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess forms carefully, then know that you should open it after three days and correct the position of any deviated matter within it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now examine the wound and place your hand over the opening of it for several days; it exists in the dark place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually, it should be treated with that potent medicine and discussed regarding its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in alchemy, the student is not exempt from seeing certain things and, when you are daring with the operation, you must be careful.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been observed by some of those who are in the art, and someone said that fire should be made in the air with a perforated vessel through which water flows.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you should not think that this has been perfectly achieved in our land or is written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices of magic, so that it may be about those who ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this subtle triangular shape, the acute end thus as with that form.
Capitol .xxiv.	**Chapter XXIV**
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various attached flesh masses occur, of which some are caused by the growth of small pebbles or polyps; and this malady is called polyp because it resembles those feet represented [in diagrams].
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, blue-black in color; and this is the flesh of a lion, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those who have this lion's flesh, free from fraud or cancer, you should operate between the thighs with your hands, expose it to the sun, and cauterize the nose of it, and prick the small hairs on those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and then cut what you have understood from those by a fine knife between the partitions, knowing that all the flesh is held; if there is any cause of which the separation is possible, then here use a sharp or fine instrument to separate it without any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it is an infected or acute apothema (abscess), then apply what it covers; but if it is a malignant apothema, then cut and cauterize that part until the abscess is drained and all cavities are healed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then carefully make incisions in the nose, adding salt water or vinegar as needed.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is open and during the process, humidity enters the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh filled with pus over the bones of the nose to which the abscess has not penetrated.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must insert a knife into the part which has any hardness, and cut through it with sharp movements, and between each cut, adjust the amount of force or gentleness, and operate on the disease by inserting one end of the knife into the flesh at an angle or for another reason possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this is done, it releases its scent so that it reaches the canals of the nose and settles on the mucous membrane, as strange sights often attract children to school, and it is a minor cause for anyone who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the knife, one end protruding from the nose and the other expanding inside the nose, and apply pressure on the flesh with a lock made of meat around the cuts, doing this until you know that the flesh is pressed against the cuts of the knife.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the knife and place a cold compress on the nose for several days or more until the swelling subsides and the pain is completely gone from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then, at the end of the treatment, insert a lead pipe into the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If the treatment is complete, use that which has been explained.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the purging instrument, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small lamp with an open top, having a small cavity, and appears like a miniature.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed pipe with cane, and the cannula of the purging instrument be flat, open; it should have a handle at the rear end of it, which you hold when you suck oil or water from the suction causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these herbs are precious: take of castor roots, white birch bark, ginger, and safron piles, long pepper, horse tail, and epithym (spice) with honey and wine, mix with the juice of nettles and burdock, make pills, and take one pill with cold water in the morning, applied to the affected parts.
Capitol .xxv.	It appears that you have provided a reference or a heading, but no text to translate. If you have additional content from the medieval medical treatise, please provide it, and I will be happy to assist with the translation.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow on the tips of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	More often than not, a growth on the tip of the nose is a benign tumor, and its size increases and becomes noticeable over several days, at which point it warrants attention.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should pay attention at the onset of its appearance, and remove it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply the cautery or medicine that burns over the area where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision takes too long, it should be considered, and if it is smooth, hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation, do not touch that bone, which is called the "apostema crancos", because the pain experienced by the one who incises this apostema is great evil for him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is not painful and has a bright color, and it is possible to make an incision in all parts, then evacuate the patient's malady and make an incision without fear, and treat the area with something that promotes healing and makes it firm until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when the continuity is broken due to a disease or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it causes little effect in that operation only in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you perceive any cause of those, considering it a fresh plague or its infection, and then you adjust the two edges of the plague with sutures, and afterward, take care of that inner part so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the solution of continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should take care to remove each part from its neighboring tissue as long as it does not get infected.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then, adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and treacle over those, and place a piece of delicate plaster or any other consolidative dressing over it, leaving it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the plaster, and take care with ointments so that they heal by themselves.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of sewing is that you add the solution for continuity with needles as we have recommended in the surgery of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as it has been taught to you and done.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Capitol .XXVII.**
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	To extract those causes that come in both lips within parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often observed in many people within the parts between their lips are certain hard spots resembling dried fat from errors; some of them are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should open the lips and crevices of each of those hard spots from every part, then return the sac containing the fluid, and wash it with wine and treat the area with water that has been warmed, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the removal of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often seen on the gums, which the ancients called alba, is a growth that you should remove with tweezers or cut with a knife, and let the healthy blood flow run through it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply to that place a sage poultice or other astringent or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the cause of toothache.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When, on the surface of the teeth within and without, as well as between the gums, there are hard, rough edges, bands, and some blackened areas that are inflamed and turn to a yellowish or greenish color, this causes corrosion in the gums and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you must remove the malady between your fingers and place the end of it on a cloth, and pull out the teeth in which these hard edges and similar sand appear, without causing any further harm, and do this until they are free from blackness and yellowness and other discoloration.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if something remains in the beginning of reason, well and good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those things on the other day and the second and third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth require various types of scissors and various shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the scissors with which the tooth is extracted from its place are different from the scissors with which teeth are cut between themselves, and these forms of scissors should be prepared as you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and diligence in its complete eradication, as there is no cause for it to remain weak after its removal, for it is a noble substance within which excuses cannot be made for its eradication.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, since the pain sometimes deceives and makes one believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract the affected one, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, how must you be certain which tooth is painful, and since you know this, you must cut into the gum around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some force, until it is completely detached from the tooth, and then use your fingers or small pliers, beginning at the smallest point, until it loosens.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use large forceps for a good grip or extraction, placing the patient's head between your hands that hold it firmly, and treat the tooth gently so as not to cause more pain to the diseased area.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it there in every way with facility and effort the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or decayed, then know that you must cover it with a piece of cloth from that wound and stretch that thin wire to the end so that it is not torn in the hour of your constriction over those jaws.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be sure to perform the scarification carefully in the entire circuit of the gums and watch closely so that you do not break or tear that split part of it, and return to the patient for further treatment due to the evil that is greater than the initial pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and rash attempts at removal, for they do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, you will often see that they bring great misfortunes upon men, which are much more difficult to treat, and the roots of their teeth completely crushed, or some of those, or some other bones extracted from the jaw, as we have witnessed with our own eyes.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with wine or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are discharges from the wound for some time, and as you observe more movements, cut off some amount of tissue and wash over the wound, and if that tissue does not stop the discharge, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps should be subtle, as they are used to extract teeth at the beginning, with a long and thin end, a short handle, and a thick middle, so that they do not bend when used in such cases.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And likewise, when using forceps with thick handles that you do not want to bend when first applying them, they should have short ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron with right-angled ends, and on the ends of those forceps are teeth that interlock with each other and begin to constrict firmly from close proximity, and sometimes the ends of those forceps have the shape of a bird's beak, which is curved, and they are very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck for some reason, you should place your finger over the area with pressure for one or two days until it becomes softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a crow or a glove, forming the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be filed or sharpened with a file or chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, you should then press down and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And take a thin but strong twig, small in diameter, and do not cover it so that it is not bent.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the incision is forgotten, this is it; otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now, with this instrument, having two slopes, the appropriate form is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments used for dental extraction; for gently making an incision, this instrument resembles a large knife, and its form is...
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may have some thickness, but is not covered so as not to be squeezed.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments with many teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans in this art discover by themselves what means to employ according to the nature of the operation and various ailments; for there are ailments to which the ancient ones did not give a name or create a specific tool because of their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the jawbone or any other bone in the mouth is squeezed, then apply gentle pressure to it in its proper place using the tools and forceps we have mentioned for removing tooth roots, and assist with the maneuver that this shape demands.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small defect, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that nothing evacuates or leaks out until all bones are completely healed; and then restore the area with suitable medicine for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, quickly remove any debris from that hole and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Capitol .xxxii.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of the prominent teeth among others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent in an unnatural way due to their shape, particularly in women, and especially in very young ones; then consider this: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, you should extract it; unless it is not attached to another tooth, then you cut it off with this instrument which has a very sharp pointed end, similar to the tusk of a pig.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made in such a way that it takes place over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and no other teeth are affected by it.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed and needs to be filed down, then use this iron file from India with this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all this should be of Indian iron and the margin precisely; and it should have small pointed points as if made with a lime, whose teeth are slowly filed day by day with ease, so that there is no other tooth like it, which would corrode and destroy.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then take lines at the end, and carefully those with other types of scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose loss causes the tongue to bleed, then you must file that space between the extraction of that fraction until its roughness becomes smooth and stopped, and apply pressure so that the tongue does not tear nor the speech be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .XXXIII. (Note: "XXXIII" is Roman numerals for 33)
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are affected by sudden impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the condition cannot be strengthened with conventional treatments using styptics, and your care has not been effective, then consider those who will be tightened with gold rather than silver thread, for silver turns black and soon disintegrates, but gold remains unchanged forever.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the thread should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the technique of the repair is that you take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then, as it grows, curve the thread in a twist between two damaged teeth, or if only one remains, make sure the fabric reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat the stitching within the gap from which you began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill so as not to damage it.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And it is your duty to tighten the string around the teeth so that it does not come loose.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then you cut off the excess ends of the thread using forceps or scissors and insert them in certain places with your fingers, and then guide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so as not to cause harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then fasten it tightly with a strap as if it were a Roman belt.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it or them with another thread in the same manner for as long as necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the way to arrange the teeth and the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as you perform these manipulations:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their proper place in their locations and they are healed as we have recomposed them, and they continue to ache.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this can only be done by skilled artisans and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes it is caused by some reason related to the bones of a cow, and it is made like a tooth from them, placed in the same place where the tooth was missing, tightened as we have said, and remains and serves as such for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv. (Note: "Capitol" here might be a mistake, as it typically refers to the end of a book or a legislative body; the correct term for a chapter number in this context would be simply "Chapter X.XIV.")
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Regarding the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which you see leaving the tongue on certain occasions is either naturally attached or accidentally caused by a disease that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, eliminating its presence in the thigh; raise their tongue, and then cut through that nerve ligament according to its extent until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or tightness, and this is due to the healing of a disease, then you apply oil and cut through it according to its extent until you sever the ligament and dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause any rupture in the tissue of the flesh, and cut through its rear side so that pus can flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the dressing of the incision with water or wine or washed water; and place a cushion under their tongue; it is necessary that the patient keeps their tongue raised at night so that it does not adhere again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a blood flow occurs, apply vinegar to the site; if the wound bleeds, cauterize the area with a hot iron suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that cure for the other causes as well, so that it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter" in this context, as it is a common title for sections in medieval medical treatises.)
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	To extract the ranula (a type of cyst), use a knife.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue becomes infected and resembles a small, firm object, preventing its normal movement; it swells so much that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the treatment for it is to open the patient's mouth wide, facing them towards the sun, and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you notice a thin, dark, hard mass that the illness does not affect, do not touch it as it is brittle.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white and is moist, then insert your thumb into it, cut off the thin layer, and divide it completely; if you have fresh wind during your operation, then place a clean bandage over it, using vinegar to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely treated it, after washing it with vinegar and salt; and take care of the other treatment for this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Capitol .xxxvi.** (This seems to be referring to a chapter or section number, without a direct translation.)
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of the abscess from two ears and that which is nothing in the throat, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When inflammation occurs in the stomach, there are glands that are gathered together, which cause external symptoms and are called two auricles; if you treat them with what we have said in the previous division and it does not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the disease is of a dark color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of pus; instead, wait until it matures, and either you will extract it or it will break open on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that must be cut into.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, in view of your operation, if the abscess has rested completely or if it has decreased in size; then stop the malady facing the sun, and place the head of the patient in a low position, open his mouth, and have the servant press between their fingers the tongue of the patient gently with an instrument that has this shape.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And whether it is made of silver or bronze, it should be fine and sharp.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you have pressed the tongue against that point and observed its usual behavior, take pliers and grasp it at the base, then pull it out of the body as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that pulls some cause from the tunic, then slice with an instrument of this kind:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled like forceps, however the ends of them are curved, so that the edge of each of those is on the right side of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron smeared with wax.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then use a scalpel of this shape: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having made one incision, make the other according to this same manner of incising, and then close the wound with clean water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If blood flows, cure it with a decoction of poppy seeds or laurel leaves and similar things until the flow of blood is stopped and proper care is taken so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes in the gullet there are other apoplesses besides these two, and make incisions into them according to what you have said about making two incisions equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an apostema that was born in the throat of her, an apostema that tended to a dark color, with little feeling, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she would have died if more time had passed, even one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already grown so much that it had caused two ridges to form, which will heal through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, you should listen to them first and stay in one of their houses, take out the abscess, and throw away a significant portion of it. Then, identify the exact location from which the other discharge originates, and press firmly on it. Take hold of their tongue, and then place the abscess in that spot.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you should make a large incision, and instead of blood, only a little pus will flow from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the condition of that woman is severe, and she will soon begin to drink water, then eat food. Therefore, you should not repeat the incision on the abscess for a long time, as it will just form again in the same place, prolonging the suffering.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should prepare and apply a poultice to the patient, and then additionally use heat; and afterward, walk around and do not be unclean, for God willed it of you.
Capitol .xxxvii.	It appears that the text you've provided lacks a complete or coherent sentence for translation. The phrase "Capitol .xxxvii." suggests a reference to a specific chapter or section, but without the actual content, it's impossible to offer a meaningful translation. If you can provide the full sentence or paragraph, I'd be happy to assist with the translation.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Regarding the knowledge of when it (the hernia) appears.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh (accumulation of mucus) occurs in the hernia, and it is prominent and long, then it is called non-perpendicular; and if it is in the groin area, thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If it (the hernia) is treated as we have described in the previous section, and your treatment does not agree, and indeed, you find that it has become prominent already, and it is subtle, then you should understand that those which are rounded additions need to be addressed; and if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, either dark red or black, and it is not painful to the touch, then you should fear the incision, for there is danger in this condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you examine it according to the manner I have said, in terms of its whiteness and length, then dislodge the malady, press the tongue with your instrument that shapes and cuts the edge into a new one, lower it and incise it with one of two instruments that are called for in the incision of two veins.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be mindful not to incise it unless it is appropriate according to the natural term of its addition, for if you incise it too much, you will alter its course.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, use what we recommended for the incision of two veins and dress it so that it heals properly.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is afraid of the incision due to fear, use cunning in the cauterization process to alleviate their concern; the method of the cautery on it is simply sharp water, and this is how you should proceed: place the head of the hernia in a suitable position, press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take some of the water we spoke about in the chapter on cauterization, apply it to the living wound, do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concave part of the instrument that has this shape.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the external part of the cavity where the medicine is placed be similar to the curve of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person is eliminated by the internal medicine, so that no further cause descends onto the throat of him/her and it heals.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it over the uvula for a space of about an hour until that part becomes darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take hold and wrap that over the edge of the wound, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the wound into the cloth through a tube above, so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it rest for three days or four until it dries and falls off.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the treatment, do so, and with the cautery abstain from the area around the grape (i.e., the affected joint) moistened with oil, purify it with that which is in the circuit of its medicine, wash it with warm water, treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with diuretics until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is far more effective than incision and is less fearful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	At times, gout is cured by water that is subtler than cautery or incision, as it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, licorice, camomile, broad (mallow) and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; the mixture should bubble; then let the wave be gently stirred appropriately, and in the middle of the wave place a tray, on which rests an instrument made of silver or iron according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the patient's mouth until the vapor raises the uvula above the soft palate, until the uvula is completely obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process on all the hardened areas, but be careful not to do this treatment while the patient is eating, as it would be too aggressive on the hernia, and you must not do that unless you have properly diagnosed the hernia.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument, take a cane and, at the end of it, make a hook with hot iron, so that it closes the patient's mouth, as the hook of hot iron prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii. (Note: "xxxviii" is likely indicating the chapter number, not a translation.)
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and other substances adhering to the skin, and from other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Other motes or debris may adhere to the skin, or spines in the feet, or from any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then, you should extract what is visible from these, using your finger as an instrument solely in front of the light, so that you can clearly see what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is not visible and is hidden in the mouth, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since the strong cause attached to the mouth will be forgotten through vomiting; or make them swallow a piece of napkin or shredded lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and mix it strongly with salt, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where there are spines, it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a snake, open it and tie its entrails to a table and carefully extract them; or take a pig, cut it open and carefully remove the entrails.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If we do not remember those causes that we have mentioned, use a lead instrument in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And make it sharp, like a nail, and at the end of it is a hollow cavity that you insert into its mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And he raises his head and looks at the touch of his throat bone, so that he understands it as if an bone or a spine pushes him, or something like that, which the doctor puts his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if that evil pain enters more, by the knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and it pushes down, and pulls his hand with the instrument on him, according to the amount prepared for it, until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	About the extraction of blood from the esophagus.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating blood in the esophagus as we have discussed under remedies and not with drugs, consider the sun's heat on the patient's throat, so that you may move his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find the blood, extract it from a small or subtle place with careful movement.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's esophagus, and place a heated iron in the concave part of the needle, and do this several times (until the blood has stopped flowing and is no longer in the esophagus), and keep the patient well hydrated throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel filled with hot water, apply its mouth to the affected area, and wash it; do not allow any cause for concern or worry over the water, as soon as you feel the warmth of the water, move it elsewhere with your hand.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with spices or herbs using the instruments we have prepared for suffumigation of the throat.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as it suits the case.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another method of treatment by suffumigation: take a vessel in which there are burning coals, cover it with a cloth, and place the opening of the instrument over this; then apply the suffumigation from above; have the patient breathe through the end of the tube, and close their mouth to prevent the suffumigation from escaping, until you know that the suffumigation has reached the lungs, for the lung blood will soon be cleared.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you do not eat, repeat the process of fumigation more often, avoid bad habits, consume salty and bitter foods, do not drink water, and it is necessary that at this point, this regimen be completely abandoned.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the gullet when necessary; it resembles tongs, albeit with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the gullet, and its end resembles the beak of a crane, which is smooth, in which case, when it grasps any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discussion regarding heretical beliefs and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apoptoses are special spots, of various manners, as we recall their memory, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in piercing and cutting them in two ways: one is for the specific type of apoptoses themselves; and another for what we understand about their humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second way is for the places where accidents in the body occur, for the aposteme occurring on the head is different from the aposteme occurring on the buttocks; and the aposteme occurring in the fleshy part is different from the aposteme occurring in the joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Some types of apoptemas cover those that do not need to be pierced but rather allow for the maturation of health in those or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other apoptemas require piercing when they are crossed and do not mature according to their completion; also, there are apostemas close to joints, where if an apostema appears near a joint, its presence prolongs the condition until you can address what is in the flow of that joint, and it strengthens the corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an apostema close to a major member, and if you delay piercing it within its maturation period for the member, it will cause issues for the entire member; or it is near the buttocks, so piercing should not be done without complete digestion, but rather the one near the buttocks, so that it cannot extend into the parts inside the buttocks and form a fistula, or be left in an unfinished state within the term of the condition.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Maybe you already know the time for drilling the fistula, and that's when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it has matured when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in redness and pulse, and the head of the fistula becomes more pronounced, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the drilling should be done at the site of pus accumulation beneath the fistula and also from the pus coming from the healing of the lump.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the drilling is always done through the thickness of the flesh or the body, if the fistulas are in the thighs or feet, and in places of ligaments, of the nerves' cords, of the arteries; and finally, in all similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use drilling according to that particular member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy part, it is better to wait until its digestion is confirmed by the second complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, it prolongs the course of the pus and severely damages its edges and depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes abscesses should be perforated according to the extent of the flesh or body part's need, or based on what member requires it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should make small punctures, and in large abscesses, a larger perforation and wider cuts according to the diversity of the abscess' size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other types of abscesses where it is necessary to open and drain them, when done correctly, are like those that occur in cases of gangrene and boils; just as they do in many instances of doubt and bumps.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And those who make incisions with a saw have three angles; and of these, one is cut as if with the figure of a myrtle leaf, another with the apices of the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which circular and lunar incisions are made, they resemble these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Those who have no such apices as the joints of lions should make their incision only superficial or flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And how, when the apice is thick and has collected much pus, you should make an incision there and not cut out all the pus at once; after removing a part of it, wait until the next day and then remove another part, increasing gradually according to the degree of inflammation until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is very frail, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, because the animal spirit moves quickly at the exit of pus, and often they die from the malady, and you must operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	He advises great caution in this chapter, and he directs you to clean the wounds where you make these incisions, considering whether the infection of the ulcer is mild or a broad section; then administer medications from him or some other remedy; if the ulcer is large, and the openings of the incision are numerous, ensure that you apply pressure to each wound until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a piece of the ulceration detaches from the flesh or if it is concave in the circumference, then you must carefully close it with thin thread or cloth, just as when you use bandages or tweezers; keep it moist and tighten it after three days; and treat and heal it with suitable remedies until it is sanitised.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If there is a flow of pus during your operation, then you must administer warm water and vinegar, mixing them with cloth, and place it over the area where the pus is flowing; repeat this several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flows of blood persist, know that you must administer treatment and care, and use the powders recommended in various parts of this our body and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter, and the affected area is rich in nerves, know that you should apply poultices of wine and oil, and place them over the affected spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place poultices soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, and change them every other day, as we have said, and know that you must loosen the apostema, clean the area, and administer the treatment that best suits it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apostemas universally, but according to the distinction I have already mentioned, we will speak of every type of apostema and how its cure should be administered in each case.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of apoplexy that occurs in the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the head, small apoplexies occur, which are of different types with coats that contain them; and their species have different names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come drops, and those contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture similar to dew, and resemble them; and those are the ones that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those [apoplexies], there is no fear, as the removal of those does not cause harmful resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the procedure for cutting these is that you expect them to take the shape of the instrument which you will use, called an entrome, as you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what is described here involves humidity, then cut along that as a section according to its length by making a superficial cut in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of line B within line G. After the humidity is evacuated, you scrape that part which contains that humidity, and do not leave from that any cause for concern, as you have seen no other cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the affected part in Egyptian (or any) ointment if present, and otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that plague and leave it for another day, as this corrodes everything that breaks through that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment repeatedly to that part according to necessity, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin condition; treat the disease with the ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with fat nodes, then incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make a section in the shape of a cross, and open it between the two lips of the section, then remove that part entirely, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If it causes you discomfort, then do what I have told you at first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscessed section with softening agents as we have told you; and if the abscessed section is softer, it is because it has little pain and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are certain conditions of these abscesses which are in the head, especially in old women, and they enlarge the abscess so much with a hard, sharp, white discharge that it cannot be drained, and if anyone were to touch it, he would become infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases of abscesses in the head, different from those mentioned above, which appear on the scalps of children and require shaving the hair around them, all these should be sectioned through superficial incisions.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their discharge, so that the matter from the infection is not spread to lower parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then take care of those who need it according to the treatment prescribed for them.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii. (This appears to be a section header, indicating the beginning of a new chapter.)
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the section on scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Unlikely motas (nodules) or bumps occasionally occur in these areas, namely the collarbone and armpits, as well as in the angles (of the body), and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the collarbone are nodules generated among them, and all scrofula from those comes from their own tunic, just as with the nodes and bumps on the head, when they have been corrected.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are nodules, some of which are rocky hard, others contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one where you feel good upon touching, of which the color that appears is specific to the color of the scar, and it is reduced from every part, and not attached to the nerves of the collarbone, nor to the veins, nor to the muscles, and it is not swollen, then you should incise it at the dry surface of the affected area, from the area next to the body, within the lines G. and B., and remove it entirely from the part, and cut away any small edges or nodules if necessary, as we have said regarding the bumps on the head, extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it requires greater caution that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the knife should not be too sharp or fit your hand too tightly, or disturb the patient, and you should only cut what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, it would prevent the flow of medicine, worsen the infection, and leave that area in a state of discomfort until the inflammation subsides and the wound begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until the task is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then carefully examine the aforementioned small lumps and, if any are found to be caused by a different condition, cut them out and clean the area.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is at the root of a great scrofula, you must be careful not to pierce that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	You must also be careful not to break that thin, tightly folded cloth and ensure it does not tear on its own.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with warm honey, which you have already applied in the Egyptian manner, and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you pierce the scrofula completely, be careful to close both sides of the wound and apply a poultice immediately so that no excess discharge occurs.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be careful to identify and pierce the root of it, drain it, and then apply a suture and treatment as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing humidity, make a superficial incision here where you see the site of the abscess in the body, and apply the incision to that which is filled with pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then apply the incision, using certain medicines and similar substances, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see the wound already cleaned, then you apply a medicine made from generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the beginning of a new section in the medical treatise.)
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the piloth (or surgeon) regarding the treatment of an abscess caused by an injury to the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used this section in the epigastric region, and they have not seen anyone in our land who could do it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	One must be careful in men, understanding that the extraction of the epigastric region should be avoided, as by doing so youthfully, all the veins and the most significant parts of the malady are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have aphthas in the mouth or throat or between the teeth, when the malady is not in the intestines, one must understand how to avoid the extraction of epigastric regions to escape the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to do this, one should inscribe the epigastric region with three circles within the circles of the epigastric region, or make a small incision in the middle of that space between two circles for quantity, making the incision in bone, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the gouger slightly, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if you get hurt from any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then, he should insert the knife according to what we have recommended; this means regarding the section of the channel for the flame that is positioned here, which is from the matter that is out of place and by the removal of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is right and the perforation is feared, add two layers of the wound's cord, and use that only to remove the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then, administer medicines that help the flesh heal until it is cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed is nothing but to see that some of these symptoms have already weighed down the patient's condition, and the disease has entered into death, and the breath of the patient is cut off at the place of the malady through some respiration, so that he may be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, he will keep the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; so now you will command the wound thus, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for myself, is that a servant cuts with a knife and makes an incision in the patient's throat, and they cut off a piece of the lung tissue, and I was called to heal it; and I looked at its condition as if it were the cry of someone dying, and I uncovered the wound, and I searched for the source of the infection that had come from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you must confess that neither a vein nor an artery has been injured, and the wind is blowing from the wound, and treat it as if it were on fire until it heals.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not cut into the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilot (possibly referring to the appendix), there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section concerning the abscess that occurs outside the wall of the abdomen, which is called a hernia of the abdomen.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called hernia of the abdomen, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can be divided into two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural, there is no cure for it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is divided into two manners; one is similar to gout, and the other manner is an apoplexy caused by the obstruction of an artery, which is fearsome.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make assumptions about it with iron except for the one who seeks it.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it and investigate it as I have said, and if it appears similar to gout, and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you puncture it thus like a nodule, and extract that which causes it to hurt from the flesh and bursas; otherwise, you should scrutinize its entire being, and pay attention to the place in need of cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the removal of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes have various types and I have already described all their kinds in the previous division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important that I explain the difference between a node and an exitus, so as not to doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that an exitus (a discharge) is a sign of heat, fever, and violent pain, until the ebullition (suppuration) of the superfluity ceases, and putrefaction takes hold, which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A node, however, is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and has the character of that lion which is taken out (of the body) by itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, as if they were fat and contained humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a hernia, that you expel this and inquire about that at the beginning of the storm which is called intramuscular, according to how its form will come in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the way of inquiry for abscesses and all hernias, that you take this instrument and intrude that into the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your threads into it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you will close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you will extract the instrument and consider what has remained in the track of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then incise it with a shallow cut as I have said in the other apothems.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left from the intrusion, then you know it is grave.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, lift it up and extract the stone from all parts with ease, and examine the skin or sac over it, if possible, and pull out that stone from its place.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, it may not be possible to extract that stone, and you should act accordingly, and carefully extract it from within as long as it does not break any further.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If due to some cause, whether little or much, the intestines return according to nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that any part of the intestines has become blocked, complete the disorder with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the inflammation, and apply a hot poultice over the one that is most infected, and treat the other from another cure until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this mixture that it incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is pulsatile against it, or not pulsatile, then you cut and apply to the place of inflammation a tri-folded cloth with vitriol and leave that tight for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanc; and then return to dissect what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, some are larger, and of these there are middle-sized ones, and of these there are smallest ones.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the smallest instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of aluminum, and of suitable material for the extremities, in a way that suits the instrument to the apertures.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the ways of the experienced ones, who are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the 'herbalist'.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three parts of the spice, one part is greater, another middle, and the smallest.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced greater part:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced middle part:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced smallest part:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, these are to be used by those with apertures, ruptures, fistulas, and hernias, so that they can enter between the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus are made round, thick, golden needles, also with large ones sewn, from citron erams, or iron erams, or silver erams, and the best are those made from citron erams.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experienced ones use black plume, which they say are opened by these to be reflected in the cavities of which there are reflections, which are reflected back to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds of them, some being longer, others shorter, and others of medium length, according to the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced great plume:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced shorter plume:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the experienced smallest plume:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the pricks are of various spices, some being simple, with only a curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their body's humors, there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those, there are two curves, which are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	They have three curves, which are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single curve half-way:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single small curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large body curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a half-moon, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small half-moon, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A large half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A half-moon shaped object has two curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A small half-moon has two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	A large half-moon has three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A half-moon shaped object has three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	A small half-moon has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are dried and sharpened to cut through nodes and apoplexes, and they are of three kinds: one is large, another medium, and a third small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large scalpel form:
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium scalpel form:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small scalpel form:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, while the other ends are not sharp and are not curved in a way that would cause injury to veins or nerves during incision; and for these reasons, the condition improves with treatment, and after the node's excision, the patient experiences less pain and greater comfort due to the appropriate adjustment necessary for the excorvation of the apoplex.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almighty weapons, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great power:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of medium power:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small power:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and look like a ray that also makes alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the extreme end, there is a pointed spatula hidden, which goes into the wound from within and without, as you wish, so too sometimes.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among these times when piercing the apostemes and do not perceive them as malautes, are of three kinds: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the windpipes through which the air flow is blocked, and there are three types; large, medium and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus skin, round or slightly elongated, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of windpipes be large, medium and small, so that they can obstruct the flow of air at the right speed in case of need, and when they are not used for treatment at first.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using them to block air in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, just as with the scales on the legs and thighs, and on the armpits, mamilla (breast), abdomen, and groin, similar to their appearance on fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times these instruments are made like small scalpels from bone according to this form; for the incision is made when it is cut by phlebotomy, or a vein or artery incision.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the nipples of men, which are assembled (or connected) with women's breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some incisions show the breasts of certain men to be swollen due to sleep, and upon waking, they are even more swollen, and the breasts of women are assembled and become prominent.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to do this, they should make an incision in the middle of the moon (scrotum) according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal what needs to be healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple recedes from its attachment and is softened by its magnitude, as it should be in women, then cut it in two pieces, one above the other, resembling half moons, each containing the end of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form of the line .B. and .G. And then excise the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about sutures and powders, as necessary for the healing, until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision properly for the restlessness of the patient's condition and the flow of pus, then fill the wound with hot liquid and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the grime, and then treat that until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	**Chapter LXVIII**
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are due to scrofula, hard swelling, which contains a puss-like material.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those (abscesses) that contain humidity, those with humidity should be incised during the waxing moon according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, you should seal it with a bandage and check it again the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage stayed and treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the kind that occurs in the lymph nodes and in scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said regarding the incision on scrofula generally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread so that it causes putrefaction, then apply cautery to it as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks through and the wound is solidified, one then observes the appearance of abscesses and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is from an arrow, a long accumulation occurs in the anterior part of the body; and when you press the abscess, you feel a whistling noise within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein is rounded towards the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is dangerous, especially in those that are left with open wounds, and in the angles, and in the collarbone, and in many parts of the body; it is very large, so great care must be taken to avoid its treatment, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Place a poultice on the affected area due to inflammation from archery wounds, cut in the middle section along the length; then open the cut with scissors and remove the arrow, and cleanse the wound until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take the needle and make it penetrate between these two parts, and split the arrow in half at two points—which causes you to extract two arrows from the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the pressure to the area between the two ligaments with a spatula until the swelling goes down and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and care for it with suitable poultices until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess caused by vein section, then you must have your hand over the abscess at the closest point possible to prevent further spread, and insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, making it penetrate; and pull on the thread in a double motion until you extract it from the other side, and tie off the abscess with suitable ligatures as I have mentioned regarding the grapevine ligament on both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might break, insert the needle again at the same place of the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Next, dry the wound in the middle part of it; then, when the swelling has subsided, you make an incision to remove the excess skin, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the poultice you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the treatment that is done with heat and cold until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	The final stage of the wound, which occurs due to nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, when a wound occurs in the rear and in the veins, and appears to be like a wound occurring in the nerves due to their compression or excessive work, or similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done most effectively in the areas of the assistants or the legs, or in any place where the joints are afflicted.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it is in its most vital dispositions; when it is suddenly tightened by violence, the patient feels the illness as stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an apoplexy of the chest, and for that reason, the patient is left with the belt loose; he is afflicted throughout his body, and he does not move towards any part in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who have it in the joints do not know that it is infected with iron, because how strongly they will experience contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One should tighten the belt around those who have it on their head or forehead with a cloth.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a minor abscess, then cut it open with scissors and incise it at its base.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, cut it out, and close it; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs due to an incision on the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people also suffer from swelling in the belly and other parts of the body, which are called fungal infections due to their resemblance to mushrooms; their roots are fine and the heads are large; and their lips are intertwined, and they are often small but can be magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in their belly were two parts that functioned similarly, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [parts] were everted and split open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should cut these open and compress them on the foot, one weighing 18 grains and the other 6 grains.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the illness is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, moist, of subtle texture; then you cut them with a broad knife, and bring the cautery near to them over fire, for you must drive out the humors as seen, and if the humors remain, cauterize that part.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and anxious, beware of sudden cuts with a knife; instead, take some fresh lead, tighten that bandage in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop tightening the large lead until it is completely severed and falls off by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the part is of thick texture, there is no cause for fear or anxiety in its incision, especially in those located in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut away the bulk of it, and then cauterize that so it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of it until the disease is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to attempt to incise that which is of a dark color, with little feeling, and moves slowly, for that is absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us recall certain things concerning this illness.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure for hernia (or "eminence of the navel").
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia (or "eminence of the navel") is caused by various factors: either through fissures in the abdominal wall over which the intestine or hernia protrudes; or because of a sac that forms due to the flow of blood or air, as described elsewhere; or due to excessive gas accumulation within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is indeed due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the hernia sac, then the appearance of the hernia may resemble the patient's skin tone; and it causes severe pain, and can present itself in various ways.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the exit of the hernia, you observe the position of that mass which we have mentioned, with greater or lesser intensity, and when you press on it, you find it occluded, then return; it is very strong in its place, and a great deal of effort is required for the introduction of water and intense work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, you will feel a hard mass and it is not occluded when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or ruptured.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear: the abscess becomes black and declining in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is hard, thick and firm, and it forms according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind, then the touch of it is hard.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or vein, or from airiness; then you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it is taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias by rearcidity and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must order the patient to take a deep breath and lie down; and immediately make an incision around the entire navel at the place where you have detected the attempt; and extend the size of the hernia above and below with great care; and then close the wound with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then open the middle of the hernia extended over the ligament and insert your finger in that point to explore the intestine; and if you have tightened or guarded it by the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the fabric, then take that oily substance; and cut away its excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circle around that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads, and put two needles into the loop which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will cause penetration; and then tighten the abscess in four directions over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and let the location heal until the flesh is extended and falls by itself; or cut that when it has thinned out and can be removed, and then care for it with something that covers the burns until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover as you have done with the abscess, removing the sanch or moisture which you find there, and treat it with something that covers and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have discussed, in the previous section, of the types of cracks and how they are treated by medicine, and that it is inappropriate to treat them with iron so as not to ulcerate; we have also spoken about cracks arising from the excessive use or lack of care in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cracks are in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as in the groin or in other parts of the body, and at their beginnings, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and severe, it may not respond to treatment, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has been successful in such cases.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is when it is located as we have said, you should proceed and remove the disease and purge of black choler some times, and then bleed that, if a manifest repletion is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and carefully clean the wound that covers it; and thoroughly search from all sides with a good blade to ensure that no cause for concern regarding the roots of the disease is left.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And stop the bleeding, do not abruptly remove it, press the places, and clean the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument that you can use among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it seems contrary to you to make a large bloodletting incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and carefully care for that with other healing methods as long as it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops and their symptoms, as well as the medicinal treatments for each type.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanites or the species of hypostasis, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydrops tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the patient's condition has already been weakened or it is another malady, other than that, just as in those cases of lung or abdominal problems and similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for fear of making things worse.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you examine the disease of an exuberant growth and it is nothing but dropsical, neither old nor young, then the manner of treating it is that you raise the growth between your hands, and apply yours to press the patient's belly, drain the water from the opening left by the hair, and take a sharp spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts, long one with a pointed end just as with a spatula; however, make it neither too short nor too long, so that in the operation on that, it does not enter into the cavity, and you hold it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of dropsical is from the cavities, for you will see that by cutting through the section away from the navel, about three finger-widths on either side, to the right and left of the hair, you open it up.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrops is due to disease of the tissue, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three finger-widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of the hernia is due to weakness, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And be sure that your incision is on the side where the hernia occurs, so that the excess does not flow to that place again.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then thoroughly pierce the hernia with the instrument, insert your hand into that incision, and lift it up with a spatula between the hernia and the skin, and extract it; if its size is like a thumb or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the skin again, until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is the place for the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that, and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, and in its initial part there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and at the end it has an incision according to the shape of a plume, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately tighten around the instrument, thus draining a significant amount of water in a short time; if you do not drain enough water during that time, strong pain may be caused to the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or it may lead to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should drain according to the quantity allowed by the virtue of the instrument and according to your understanding of the patient's condition based on the strength of their pulse and the goodness of the instrument.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after removing the instrument, retain the water which causes it, for it is often held by the tension of the string which blocks the hole on top of the container from which you have just extracted it; I advise you to pierce that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract small quantities of water from them for several days in fear, and be careful not to remove too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large quantity of water, then treat that as a burial in sand, and immerse it in a bath, and wait for a long time in the sun; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cautery to the stomach, and the intestines, and close off the water passage, as I have described above.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who have not yet developed the ability to control their bladder functions.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times, a child is born from its mother's belly with the head of its mixture not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should perform the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a delicate, moist sponge according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, with a delicate lead clamp, you should hold it in place, for three days or seven.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, it should be done after relaxing the bowels and bladder. Then return to its place.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the lead in place, it is possible that the urine which has flowed over this area will not be sealed by this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	However, if the opening is too narrow, it should be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for more than three days until it widens.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When those in whom the urinary tract is out of place are treated, it is said that this causes it, for those who are born with a defect of the bladder are obliged to go to the bathroom inside them due to raising the bladder with their hand above them; and it is not a hereditary condition, so much so that the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly according to its right path, and it becomes a disease caused by movement.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of surgery in this case is that the patient lies on their back, then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand while vigorously extracting it, and incise the top of the bladder at the place of the urethra with a scalpel, as if you were making an incision with a pen, or any other instrument you prefer, so that the middle part of the bladder comes out in the shape of the bladder head and the defect falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation to remove the stone, for it may happen that you cause complications; hold onto it as you cut the kidney stone, and heal the wound until it is completely cured.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albat (foreskin) that occurs on the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motas (small) veins occur on the albat (foreskin) of the penis, and an inflammation of raw and tender flesh is evident.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, consider that you suspend it with a subtle hook and remove that which remains; then place a pressure on that side using Egyptian ointment; and afterwards, treat it with fine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albat (foreskin) is malignant, then it should be tied with a string, and you must administer cautery near its incision and cut off its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis has one edge inside and the other outside, then you must wait until the inner edge adheres, but immediately treat the outer part, because if you cure that first, the foreskin might still be pulled.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have also observed accidents in the genitals and foreskin, black and swollen, so take care to clean everything that is already discolored or corrupted or rotten; then apply a line of this mixture made from flour of chamomile and fennel seeds crushed and mixed together.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat it with the other cure until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a need for bloodletting, then apply cauterization monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cautery that is most helpful has two dispositions together, it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed in that moment, then you must insert a bronze tube into the inner part of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to its head (and this adherence occurs only in those whose foreskin is their own, and circumcision is not required on them; and when adherence occurs due to disease or abscess), then you must scrape with an obtuse spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to loosen them gently, then you must scrape with a spatula the head of the foreskin and the prepucium itself; this is because when the prepucium is thin, its fragility allows it to be slightly perforated.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, which has already been soaked in warm water to prevent adhesion again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cooling treatment while ensuring it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of newborns and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for all ailments, but when it is of our own making and done by our own will, and when it concerns children, it is necessary that we give preference to this better operation and method, so as to avoid any harm to their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not use it in their laws, and only do so because we have acquired this by experience, which is why I have observed most surgeons and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and claws; and they use lint made from silk and incisions made with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and do not find any better way out than by cutting, lancing, or binding, as with the ungual (finger) nail, where the pain of the wound drives you to another incision and certain danger.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is performed by cauterization, which is digital (using a hot iron), as the blacksmiths do, is not safe for the incision of the end of the manly member, because the heat goes deeply into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, in the operation with the iron, too much heat causes damage and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and in many cases, it does not require purification in such a way that I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Through the operation that is performed with scissors and thread of silk, I have discovered by experience its goodness, because the scissors are of a proportional incision, so that the sharpness above corresponds to the sharpness below; and therefore when you apply your hand, both sharps are in harmony and proportion at one time; and a compression of the silk forms a knot of all parts, from which no error arises.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who struggles a little, do not do anything but tie the silk to its hernia just once, and let it enter into the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make that child happy in all ways, as it receives its intelligence from you.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure to be among your most prepared assistants, and do not be scared; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over your foot so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it due to impurity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tighten the location marked with a thread, tie it slightly at the base of that small one with a second thread, and place your finger on it and point to the location of the ligament left with good retention, and incise between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the instrument slightly and pull out the tip of the forceps; next, clean the wound thoroughly and gently, as it is better; sprinkle powder on it and place a cloth over the powder in which fresh rose oil has been spread; leave it like that until the other day; and treat it with cure until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities should not be of equal length, and the others should be such that the axis of the foot is not straightened, but the length of both legs should be as acute as the length of two handspans.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	For the mistake in purification lies in that the strong reading escapes the inherent code entirely, or a part of it must be cut away for the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, consider extending the one from your hand to your finger in front of the placement of the spot and incise it according to this equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, take a hook and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days and they say that it is swollen from the fiery spot, then you should leave it until the inflammation has subsided, gently extract what remains of the ulcer, and incise it as best as you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And observe the head of the hernia, as it may not be accessible.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that part which the plague has solidified with powders, as we have discussed in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is incised from the cord in the proper manner and follows the guidelines, it will not be noticeable.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to that part as we have said for it to be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an enlargement due to stones or infection, or by a blocked or full bladder, similar to what we have mentioned regarding treatment methods in the previous section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not discharged and there is retention of it due to pressure, which is already in the neck of the bladder, then know that the disease is still bent over their anus.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on someone's back and stretch their abdomen upwards from their back, and the disease tightens its grip on them as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is constricted to prevent the discharge of urine through the passages behind, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if nothing has dissolved as we have said, then the cause of the disease must be removed by an instrument called a syringe, which is shaped like this: Both silver and thin, with a tube as thin as a hair from a lion's whiskers, similar to a palm and half its length, with a thin reed at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination is as follows: take the urethra folded and tied at the tip of the penis or forepart, and insert its extremities beyond the glans, and cut it with scissors if there is any excess cause from the foreskin, but more carefully insert it into the cannula with force, and then enlarge the glans with a clamp and albumen of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make incisions on the patient over the spots affected, and open the bladder of the patient and the scrotum with oils mixed together, such as olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the glans into the opening of the scrotum until it reaches the root of the scrotum; and fold the scrotum over the opening of the foreskin; and press the glans from within; and press it until it reaches the bladder, and make sure that the pain is directed to the source of the illness, and do not follow this order, but rather place the meat in which it deviates from its normal course.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then gradually extend the urethra, little by little, as the urine dries out the passageway.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and use a catheter for urine treatment, do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition is improved.
Capitol .lix.	**Chapter LIX.**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder cleansing with a clepsydra and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When bladder ulceration or abscess, or a severe infection occurs there, and you wish to drain water and medicines from it, use an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the extremity of it is sealed, completely closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts to it: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a build-up, which is what it is driven by, and according to its quantity, it accumulates, until some cause throws out moisture from it, then it is thrown out, and when it is expelled long, as it were, a clamp is used on it, to which naphtha is attached, as in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, if you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the clamp into the moisture and throw it away from the opening, for the moisture is thrown into the concave of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the clamp into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and push the moisture towards what you are pushing, for that moisture soon reaches the bladder, and the illness often arises from it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is cristalized, and that shape is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or lead, which resembles a small feather at the top and leaves a trace of lint behind.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder and place it in motion, stop that moisture you wish to crystalize within the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the urine.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then place your hand over the bladder, pressing gently on the moisture within as it flows down into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then punch holes in this circle all around its circumference; insert the thread firmly into these channels, twist them, and then wrap the cloth tightly around it as if to form a container; add whatever moisture or matter you want to preserve, and smell and taste it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie him up with the instrument and make it so as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand while the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LXX (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they are describing that concise and clear exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that the pain generated in the bladder often goes to children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, appearing in that sand; and the disease scratches its own verge, causing frequent pain, and then it becomes inflamed; and this is how they get the disease.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that disease they have achieved at 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it is more common due to what is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose pain is greater and healing is more difficult; and if it is little, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to arrive at the cure for that condition, we must begin by cleansing the disease with Christ, who extracts all the gap that is in their intestines; for that gap sometimes prevents the flow of urine after its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then we should take the hernia from their feet and position and adjust it carefully so that the urine descends to the bottom of the bladder or sometimes it may jump from its place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that closure between your hands, prepared, and the other parts of him should be left open for his things; so that the bladder is entirely made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then we should remove that one and all those defects.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then you should cut yourself sometimes over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot grasp the exact touch of the disease, then cover it with oil the specific part indicated by your left hand, whether it is a child or a young adult, and insert that into its place.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And once the stone is removed, ensure it stays in the place indicated.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that pressure into the urinary bladder's opening.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure on that part indicated, and expel it outside through the opening from which you removed it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs above the patient, and with their other hand, hold the skin around the opening where the operation was performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula into the incident from which this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It divides into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle part, beginning on the left side of the fissure; and the incision should be above that bone, and as they say, in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cut is wide and inner narrow according to the quantity that can be removed from the bone without causing too much damage, for it is essential to consider the saying that the bone is in the buttock, and forgetting its weakness.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you should know that there is some bone with angles and margins, making it difficult to extract.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, there is something resembling a globe, round, and made of lighter material.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the one with edges and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your fingers over it or tighten them around it properly, the end of which should be as smooth as lime that you press onto the stone, and do not slip from it; or insert a delicate instrument with a curved tip between them.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then enlarge the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut strongly with vitriolic trepan.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your finger into the mouth of the bladder and cut into it; then gently insert a small amount of water; and in this way, if they are moved by two or more.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very intense, it is ignorance to pierce that great section, as it causes two effects on the patient: either it stops (the pain) or it leads to the continuous discharge of urine, which is why the affected area is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	They may administer an expulsion of the foreign body from within, or use a forceps during the fracture to extract that in the foot.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	After you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosin oil and water, to ensure the heat is gently released.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is loosened, moisten the area with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of honey and garlic within until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of a plague, you encounter gangrene, clean and dress the wound, and it resembles a frozen bladder (and this is known due to the exclusion of urine), then insert the small pipe into the plague and extract the pus, for if it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all species that are suitable for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the stages of treatment, make sure that you do both things and adjust the medications that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the urethra, lodged there, and urination is obstructed, then treat it with what you have recommended before it leads to impaction, for the instruments used in this treatment are often accused of causing impactions; take a metal perforator, which looks like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular end, sharp, lodged in the wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take hold of the cord, attach it to the urethra to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the metal into the urethra, piercing it gently until the stone is reached.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the metal with your hand over the stone, little by little, and continue piercing until you make an opening on the other side; then urine will begin to flow.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then apply your hand over what is broken from the stone of the kidney outside the hernia, for it is squeezed and relieved by urine, and the illness is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason, then tie a thread around the kidney and another thread on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close the opening over the kidney within that hernia between two bands.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage, clean and dry the infected wound, which is made in the ulcer.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the kidney again, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other bandage on top, for when the thread is untied, the stone returns to its place and the illness returns.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this purpose, when you tie the patient, lift their legs apart or return them to their normal position, and thus alleviate the pain as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in any of those areas, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their (stones') causes is that women who are strong and virile give birth.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second (cause) is that you do not find a woman with good knowledge to discover if she should go to the doctor when she is pregnant, or if it is from women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third sentence translates to: "The third is because you do not find many women skilled in this art, especially in the operation with their hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of incision over the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, so it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do this, then make sure you get a skilled female surgeon, as they are rare to find.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking in this, then seek out a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a female midwife well-versed in the facts of women, or a woman who has gained experience in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So do as follows: present this person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone to its beginning. The reason for this is that he must determine if the woman is a virgin; make sure he inserts his finger into her anus and checks for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, cut it off, leave its side, and then command him to pierce through that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and probe around the penis, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and extracts it at a reasonable price.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, slowly remove that, gradually massaging it from the opening of the bladder to the sides, using the power of your virtue so as to draw that out at the root of the problem.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then pierce through that position of the organ in the vicinity of the root of the problem from any side it stops and direct the penis to that opening, and his finger should not be withdrawn from the penis.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be cut slightly at the beginning; then insert the blade into that section, and if the pressure is felt, adjust the section according to the amount so that the pressure is removed from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the parts of the kidney are small and hard, and some are sharp and tough, and others thin and round, and they have points.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know the number of parts it has, according to what you have said about what you intend to do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to release the flow of blood, apply hot salt on the affected area three times and leave it for an hour until the pain is relieved, then return to your operation until the kidney stone is passed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare yourself with all the tools mentioned for the extraction of kidney stones in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from a wound that is incised, then apply powder to the area and gently press those that are pulvils (cataplasms) and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; leave the pebble (perhaps referring to a clot) and do not extract it, for the strong nature of the disease will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the intensity of the blood loss has decreased, and the location (wound) can be handled, then return to your operation until the pebble (clot) is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On section (surgery) concerning hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia of the abdomen is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white flesh, which leaves the opening of the vessels containing the bowels, and it is called the abdominal cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is within the natural fat that prepares itself at the departure of the wind, as long as it is a different organ, which is the kidney of the generator between the white rib, which we have said, and it is not this but stone.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the generators, so that this material is discharged into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck against the generators.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have moving colors, because the color of it is declining to citron or to bloody, or red, or it is dark and sticky, or it is white and watery, and it is this that is most significant.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water has occurred are as follows: for if it is in the white rib that we have mentioned, then the abscess becomes rounded and declines slightly in length like a pear, and the generator appears, because the humidity covers everything.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own panniculus, then the abscess is opened by cutting and so the doctor believes it to be another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the genitals and the white sphincter, then scraping releases the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the colour of the humidity, you should observe the colour of the humidity in the abscess as it is expressed by the discharge whose form it precedes; and according to what is observed in the trace of the discharge, judge what lies within.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be flushed if it is possible for you, and empty his bowels.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place yourself supine on your back for any cause for a short time, and lay a moist cloth over it.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the patient's left side and instruct the assistant to follow their right side, extending their leg from one to two spans at the knee of the genitals down to the opening of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a sharp knife and cut open the foreskin at its mid-point near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to the specified distance from the line where you must remove the foreskin, reaching down to the white part of the glans.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then extract it, observe, and be careful not to cut yourself; your incision should be wide enough to allow the part you are removing to come out easily while carefully examining the incision for any signs of damage or excessive bleeding.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then carefully pierce the glans with a wide enough puncture to allow all the water inside to be drained out.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the blade to the parts above; do not touch the suture that the genitals encompass, and cut the blade in that manner as is within your ability.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut into it as a whole or in pieces, and most importantly its thin edges, because if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you remove that from outside its cavity during the time of your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the blade, return inside it, and properly adjust the two lips of the suture around the genitals, and then treat it just as with the others wounds, provided that it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then understand that you must close the vessels that are above the suspenders, extract the hernia, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is added in two parts and you know that both are hernias, then incise the part as you have done with the other; and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it yourself.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should cleanse the sore, and enter into its sections, immersing them in oil or rose oil; place another cloth submerged in wine and oil outside, expanding it over both legs and the wonder of the belly; then cover it with folded drapes and poultices, and bind those to the body according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two sheets of cloth and fill them with wool, according to this form; secure the extremities at which they are joined with wet wool or cotton, and add them to the structure in the crotch of the breeches, one extremity entering between the buttocks and the other at the opening of the leg, and two other extremities on each side, leaving two others over the hips, and all adjustments should be made in the crotch of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; you take a thin cuttle bone cautery and make incisions at the base of the genitals, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white scrotum containing the water is exposed, and then take cautery in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the scrotum, and light it until all moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the scrotum with cuts, and scrape it with cuts using a finely lit cautery; cut it as best you can until all is removed; and be careful so that the fire does not touch the patient.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you should know that this operation is much safer and farther from infection than cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you discomfort to make an incision or apply cautery, or if there is a discharge of pus, then be sure to treat the condition that causes you harm through the appropriate cure as mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the illness is severe and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horrid nature, then perform an incision as we have recommended; and it is at this point, as we have said regarding the meanings, that you will know that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you know that you must sever the illness on a raised spot, then perform an incision in the area where the pus is lowest, using a wide spatula, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is the opening that should be wide enough to let all the water out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand over the area to stop the water's flow.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then apply care so that the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is any opposition to the outflow of water at that time when you perforate it: this should not be done unless the white panniculi in the orifices of the wound cause opposition and prevent the discharge of water, then know that you must insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which the water from the glands is extracted, whose shape precedes; or apply a small amount to the size of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and is retained for about a month or perhaps even longer; and when it is added, then it should be perforated in the same manner as before, so that the disease will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the start of a new section or topic in the medical treatise.)
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On sectioning a carnous hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in sectioning this hernia, great danger is present for the patient's vital functions; which is why I believe its removal and salvation through a better method is preferable.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on that one, as well as the specifics of the incisions.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the apostemas appear in bodies where the veins are composed and this is done for various reasons: either due to a sudden severe congestion of blood in the veins, or because of a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the apostema varies according to the body's color, and it does not cause pain in itself; however, a severe apostema can occur.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And it is very rare that an abscess hardens, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the compression of the arteries, or by the inflammation of those very same structures that have already been perceived as a recurrence, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This can be understood as: It is known that inflammation of the arteries causes the abscess to disappear when you compress them with your fingers; and it does not hurt.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	That which is caused by vein inflammation does not disperse the abscess for any reason without compression with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that on this type, incisions are made and on the other meats; and you insert the knife of the skilled ones, then extract the white bone, and cut the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and slice the suspensory of the pus, because after you have cut off all parts from the parts of the bone.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the bone has already attached itself to the inflamed flesh, you must extract the bone and cut it out.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the joint or between what is between the bellies, you must then carefully remove all that adhesion and cut it out with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion behind, you must then cut out everything that belongs to it and extract the bone as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with hot oil and wool; and then take care of it with the other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .LXIV. (46)
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of a hernia in the side.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess that has enveloped the testicles, somewhat similar to a growth, causing difficulty in movement and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this ailment, one must be cautious regarding what preceded it, as that is where the cure begins.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I have noted that they speak of operation according to what I did initially.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you must remove the hernia from its position on an elevated pillow; then, disengage the suspensory of the testicles from below; and hold the genitals with your hand, pressing them down toward the perineum, which has been previously prepared with lard; and have other assistants hold him firmly and stretch him out to his limit.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut with a broad spatula, using a transverse section, along the direction of the vessels while they are still exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from any remaining part, as we have mentioned regarding the extraction of stones from the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double thread, tie it in the first place where the pain occurs, and do the same again at the end of their course.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut them in the middle place with a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added due to putrid and corrupt humidity.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the plague as other plagues, in which you wish to be free, so that the vessels, which do not allow one of two generations, fall, for it is not evil through this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If a vein is accidentally pierced, you must know if the testicles are extracted or if they are compressed by the veins, in order to prevent them from receiving any nourishment due to the incision of the veins and to ensure their permanence, or compress them so that they do not receive blood.
Capitol .lxv.	It appears you've provided only the chapter number "Capitol.lxv." Without additional context or text, it's challenging to guess the content or provide an accurate translation. If this is part of a larger text or a specific section, please include more details for a more precise response.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	**On the Care of Intestinal Hernia**
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending from the arteries of the belly, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture into the abdominal cavity.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdominal wall or of an hernia, and it occurs due to various motive causes: percussion, a blow, a sudden movement, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it creates an aperture within the abdominal cavity through which the intestines protrude.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this (hernias) is when it is due to a tear in the abdominal wall, as it suddenly causes severe pain; and it appears as a different bulge below the ribcage, which is caused by the protrusion of intestines from the abdominal cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is caused by bloating, and in other cases, it runs in the hernia gap, and here it is retained, and this causes great harm to the patient, and in some cases, it causes severe and unbearable pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be cautious, for it is important to avoid harmful reactions in that individual.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for this condition is to guide the hernia back into its cavity using your hand inside the body, then place a cushion between his legs and lift them up.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then, narrow the opening of the scrotum where the testes are located on both sides, and incise the scrotum entirely through; then, fix in two folds of the cut section as needed to open the incision with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the sectioning is according to the amount that you can do, so that from it the bone is completely severed.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then carefully excise those which are left at the cord of the testes, as long as the white hard stone of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert the little finger into where the testicle is, between the white stone, where it is left at the cord of the bone, and between the second stone, and gently dislodge that adhesion which is behind the bone.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then you hold the cord of the testicles at the openings, and with your left hand pull the white stone towards you, and raise the bone against the stone where the section is made; and order the assistant to stretch out the bone further, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek out the threads that indicate there is no cause for the hernia enclosed in the hard white ciphe.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause for it within the patient, then turn your attention to the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle with a strong, thick thread of silk, and insert it into the last part of the ciphe, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is cut; and then cut the extremities that protrude from the silk within four threads, and tie them to some figure in the shape of a cross; and thus attach the ciphe whose cord we mentioned was left, firmly on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly together, ensuring that none of the vessels through which these might flow can cause any further issues, preventing gangrene from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply another dressing a second time according to the first dressing, after three days; and remove these two dressings from the side where the testicles' cord is bound by the amount of its size, cut off all the remaining edges, and close it up.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make an incision in the opening next to the testicles' cord, from which blood and urine flow, as we have recommended in what we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and use the dressing we have recommended (and sometimes white cautery is used, as we said before the incision for fear of blood flow, because it has been seen to happen on some occasions) and leave the dressing until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is delayed, then hot water should be applied and it should be left on until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment for the disease with other remedies for ailments within until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Chapter LXVI**
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventous Hernia**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no other method has been seen to be effective in its treatment except by iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first method is thus as we have recommended for hernia, which is to cut open the channels close to the affected area, and then dry the middle portion around the aperture with something that causes it to heal; until the channels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the disease as we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the displacement that is suffered in the angles (or joints).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, as we have said, the joints rupture, and the fragments protrude from the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to nature; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the condition prolongs, a fissure may form in the wall within, allowing the hernia to protrude into the cavity; and this happens due to the expansion of the wall in the joints as we have said, which causes the wall to stretch, become weak, and the hernia to protrude.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is done with a cautery in such a way that its application is preceded by the description of the condition.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the condition is cured by cutting it with a knife according to this manner: and the disease appears between your thighs, and then you should dry the site of the rupture of the prominent apostemas by making a section according to its extent depending on the quantity of three parts.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white strap that is beneath the knee while it is still uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the prominent site of the strap, and press it against the abdomen's point.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then pinch the two prominent sites on the end of the strap and adjust the suture with one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then carefully extract the end of the limb, do not puncture the skin anywhere, nor stretch the muscle excessively, or any other cause that you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then apply the cure for wounds, and when you have cut away the filth, cleanse that area and restore the wound until it is healed enough that the muscle contracts and the prominence of rupture is adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	**Capitol .lxviii.** (Capital LXVIII, meaning 68) - This appears to be referencing a chapter or section title in the treatise, indicating a topic related to medical practice or anatomy.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testes is softened because the tissues surrounding it become softened, and great care should be taken with regard to it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure the patient that he lay the malady according to his own side, and uncover all the stitches that are softened over the natural stitches; and then that he adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning, the surplus of the softened stitches can be cut with three or four incisions and a secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches; and then cure for the healing of the other ailments within that they be healed and the filth fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembering it in this book, and not being necessary to recall it except in two ways: one is so that when asked about it by a doctor who knows its cure, he may understand; and the other way is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals, as with horses, bulls, dogs, pigs, and similar creatures.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by a cut through a fissure.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then, using your hand, carefully extract the testicles so they do not appear exposed from the incision.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	For castration through cutting and sectioning, ensure you have a firm grip on the animal, then use your left hand to press down on the testicles.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then attach the suspenders, and make an incision on each testicle using a sectioning technique.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then you cut out those pus that you have removed from some excoriated area.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause untreated from the spleen, but the subtle spleen that is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by tying, for strong tying leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast does not desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then tend to the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an obstruction in the space in the scrotum containing the testicles, and in the other, it appears as if there are both male and female characteristics, with hair on the perineum (area between the genitals).
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, this flow of urine from that vein in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a difference: the womb of a woman over the vulva has two ovaries like a man's, slightly smaller, and also has the cervix of a man along with two uteruses.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary that you know how to insert those tight garments between the parts where the emission of that secretions occurs and cure them with a treatment similar to other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine is secreted from the vein in the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The swelling of the lymph glands is closely related to natural causes, as it is affected and can be felt through observation; in some cases, it becomes enlarged in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as in men and even prevents coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, if you have an abundance of lymph swelling in your hand or fingers, use your thumb or fingernails to probe.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish the incision with a single stroke, especially at the point of the knife, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that which is under cure for the wounds, until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is born hidden in the depths of the mother's wombs, until it emerges and strongly attaches itself to the exterior parts according to the appearance of a root (and for this reason some first called it "rooted ill"), therefore we must incise it as we incise the tongue, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	**On the Cure for Arthritis**
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the woman's womb is not perforated or a small tear occurs.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and it is caused by flesh not properly adjusted, or by a subtle and dense effusion.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done either in the region of the mother, or on the sides of the patient, or on the upper part of their body, or on the lower part, and you forbid all movement and engagement and childbirth, and strongly forbid menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the mother, if the pregnancy is visible, then it is recommended; but if it is not visible, then you seek it out with your hands or with a ruler.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the pregnancy is subtle and is felt in both lips, then you cut and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is placed over the two delicate lips, and then your fingers indicate both the most painful spots.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman lies on her back, her limbs extended, and then she forces both lips apart until that subtle pregnancy is ruptured and the pregnancy is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and cover it in oil, place it over the area, and apply heat to the spot daily so that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the cyst is large and thick, then cut it with a sharp knife or use a blade of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is due to food, then suspend it and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, as well as inflammation and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted to an album of oil.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the plague from healing quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days, administering warm water from the spring.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural origin of other meats, and you will know that you cut according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the natural state should not be opposed with force in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles, and red boils that occur in the rectum of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are caused by the openings of small veins, not by those of larger ones; and they become chronic when the veins have been irritated for a long time; and since old hemorrhoids form knots, they should be treated immediately.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now that we have discussed the divisions of these conditions and their symptoms, let us also say which receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron is not effective.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the upper part of the body where sensation is felt, those are the ones that are curable.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be aware that you should not put a woman in a tight dress and extend her limbs with sharp tools or rough cloth, and cut those with the razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle upon those parts the flow of sanctum from one of the powdery substances that scratch like a lion's, thus as with cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of pus persists, then make a incision for drainage, and remove the accumulated pus, as well as scabs and similar debris.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey, wine, and make a paste with this over the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess has drained, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages to the affected area and perform lancing at the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and dip it in vinegar or gallnut extract or nettle juice, soak it in wine, and make a paste at the site; then cover the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the patient, who is of severe illness, understand that you must insert this according to your understanding from what I have said above.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within, that it be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter .lxxiv. (This indicates the chapter number, with Roman numerals)
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket during an accident in the head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	You can observe various special types of abscesses in the head, such as inflammation, swelling, ulcers, scabs, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhagic and suppurative abscesses, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments and their types, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And be aware that I shall discuss in this treatise on gangrene the method you see used most often when dealing with it, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed, listen closely.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So then, consider whether the pain of gangrene in its beginning is sharp, accompanied by percussion and fever, and if you observe swelling there, do not immediately resort to perforation, but treat it with what aids its maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now, know that you should bind the woman to a bed with two supports; lay her on her back and position her feet below the waist, spreading her thighs apart, resting her arms by her sides, and securing her with suitable bindings.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stand at the head of the bed and prepare the instrument that will be used to open the womb, the shape of which will depend on the specific conditions being treated.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to use this instrument, hold the head of the knife to the skin of the woman's thigh, and whatever part of the instrument enters the woman should not be larger than the knife's edge and ease the pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the knife's edge, then you should apply poultices over the skin of the thigh to prevent any further penetration of the instrument into the thigh.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should ensure that the knife's edge is positioned above and that the assistant holds the instrument, opening the orifice of the woman while rotating the knife's edge until it is fully open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the excitation occurs and it is sensitive to touch, becoming hot and moist, then you should quickly seize that part with a clean cloth to prevent further complications.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanie (bowel movement) is evacuated, you must place a sponge soaked in warm oil or green oil on the affected area to relieve any stiffness; and hold the compress in the section near the anus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then remove the compress from the anus and place a clean, wet woolen cloth over the penis, which has been soaked in water with alums.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And the treatment is considered complete after two days, applying what is suitable for it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then immersed in water heated with nettle or aristolochia (a plant) extracts, and finally treated with the appropriate compress.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the infection is deep within the anus, you must avoid treating it with fire, but instead focus on the treatments we have mentioned in previous sections.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos should be treated when they present in an unnatural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A midwife must recognize the onset of labor by observing signs in the mother, and when she sees the woman exerting herself during contractions and desires to breathe deeply, she is urged to focus on the position of the baby within her, and hasten its delivery, for this is a sign that birth is taking place naturally. The head of the child should emerge first, or it may be suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that her abdomen is contracting to expel the child, and as it passes over its head, the second stage begins, and it is freed from those superfluous tensions with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Whoever is affected by a condition in this part of the body has an unnatural and unworthy plight, for when the drunkenness is upon their feet and the rest of their body is situated before their head and their feet, or their hand is on their foot or at their head, or their head and hand are on their belly, they are greatly twisted on their spine, and it seems like their figures are impossible to describe.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all such cases, and guard against errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the signs of these, and what skill is in them to make it understood by what it is and has been about that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is upon their head due to natural strength, and it is violent towards the woman, and becomes a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of him is already weakened, then she should do as the women have it, and apply fennel seed and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then carefully insert the meter between their dilated and fractured edges, or rather, into that with the second instrument, or directly into its nail while it is still moist.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the child is being delivered.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come down, then cover the woman with a mixture of owl's eggs and fenugreek, all ground up.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient, take off the bandage, which should be changed, and make them sneeze in that position for an hour, so that the child is delivered shortly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both feet of the child have not been delivered at the beginning, then gently reduce those that are still inside with slow movements.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her feet up, then carefully position the mat on the ground; and ensure the woman is held so she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the pains do not subside and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to the mother's hand with a cloth and remove it carefully, for that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the position of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, then you should gently push them inside, convert the small one, and slowly extract each one, taking care not to tear them.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Once they are inside the body, then command them to expel it, and make them cough up the condition, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then gradually return the affected part to its natural state until it stops aching, otherwise it will be forgotten about and neglected.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do what we have recommended, then take an infusion of althae and dissolved gum, grind it well in a mortar with a good percussion, and apply it to the pain in the hip joint of the patient, as well as the lower part of their belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then apply that compress in distilled water, until the pain subsides.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the wounds of the patient have healed, then do the smoldering with myrrh and gently apply it to them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the smoldering for an hour, then do you stop it on a cloth, and apply it to sneeze and free the patient's mouth from it, and lift that part of their belly closer to the surface with a lighter compression, as the sensation will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine carefully the condition of their teeth and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition presents itself in this manner, then you should carefully insert your hands, one after another; the woman should be bent over on her knees, with her feet down and resting on the ground, her body leaning against the support, and her hands placed on the side.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then press gently on the patient's stomach, one small area at a time, and extract whatever remains in their legs, between their toes, so that it can be prepared for disposal when the procedure is complete.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the condition is not resolved, take the patient's feet and move them vigorously, then press gently on the areas around the hip joints one small area at a time until the condition improves.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands again and repeat the process, gently urging the woman to expel it until the condition is completely resolved.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The condition of the patient hangs critically from one of its extremities.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use ingenuity to reduce the patient's hand, but if that is not possible, raise the woman's leg and try again.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If raising the leg is not possible, then have the patient lie down, and knock on their thigh bones with a forceful impact, then apply poultices and compresses as needed, according to custom.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If labor has begun, then perform the necessary procedures on the head, and carefully study the reduction of the hand, then gently return the fetus to its natural position, make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press her abdomen until the pain subsides.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The condition of the fetus is critical, with its arms and thigh muscles contracted and the fascia around it tense.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Nurse should have her hand on the baby and gradually turn him this way and that, to ease him.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as it is and how much it is engulfed, then place your attention on the corner of it where we have recommended oil and gauze.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then you command the patient to cough little by little, and once you have done this, make a compression on a small cloth and command them to lean on their right side, and then command them to change position; and make them sneeze in this condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert your second finger into your palm within, so that it may be evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the object is suspended over the face and neck, you should cut through that of the embrocation, so it does not get stuck and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently pull the object apart until it stops moving, and instruct the woman to compress it for some time, and then slowly extract it with ease, if God wishes.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that twin births are common, and sometimes it is three or four, which is strange and rare; however, these may be due to natural causes, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And regarding these cases, whether they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by counting, distinguish those within the ligament in each other's navel; some births may be lost this way, just as a single fetus may disappear naturally; however, some births may also be lost in an unrecoverable manner, just as we have described.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if certain aspects of their condition prove difficult to treat and you arrive at what we have mentioned regarding unnatural shapes, then care for them thus as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and makes it easy and swift, and uses her ingenuity according to each figure as she prepares them with the tools for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and it is necessary to have verified that a woman who has had an abortion does not become pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes pain due to the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this should be in the science of midwifery, how strong they must be to that young one resembling this, and therefore pay close attention to it so as to cover.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capital .lxxvi. (Capital [or Main point] 76)
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On removal of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus as we have discussed in the division of treatment and it is not outside the body, and you are compelled to use manual operations, then consider whether the woman is of sound health and not prone to any conditions that might lead to her loss during the procedure.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now consider that the woman should be placed face up on her back, and her head tilted downward, and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the midwife should hold both parts or be placed on the bed to prevent the body's contents from spilling out during the removal of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the patient with scents of cold humors, and with mud from alder and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife places her hand with those scents and muds, enters it with ease into the mother, and seeks the place where the cuts are made on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate place for this is: therefore consider if the fetus is ready to be born on its head, and then make cuts in the heels of it, or at the collarbone, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or leave the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the places near the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the birth is on the feet of the fetus, then in the pubis or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that he hold the thumb with his right hand, bend it at that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, insert his finger with ease and keep the thumb in one of those places we have mentioned, until he reaches the affected cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then he should hold and stay in the position of it with another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that it is equally attracted, and not extended according to its natural state only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is beneficial for the whole process, so that the manifestation of it is also alleviated as is done in various cases during the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her chosen herbs in oil and insert them skillfully and turn them over in that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the fetus' position is overlooked, then the incisions should be changed to wherever there is more discharge; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is positioned away from the other and cannot be reduced due to the hernia's tightness, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it once everything is outside, cutting it either at the joint of the hand or in the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And likewise, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the fetus' head is large, or there is compression in its presentation, or it is in a position of water-head, then insert between the sharp edges and cut off the water, or discover an instrument called "alundat", which resembles other instruments described in the appropriate chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it seems that this work is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that it cuts into that flesh or takes hold of that swelling just as we have said, and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is situated and constricted, then its fork should be cut through so that the humidity in the foot can be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not violate any rule, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the discharge from the belly is apothematous or hydrophilic, then you must perforate that part through which the humidity in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the work is above their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction towards the mother's opening should also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and foot are cramped, you must remove that thick cloth you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and foot until what is inside flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are stuck and the head cannot be turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the opening of the mother is blocked, then insert the hand into the opening of the womb, and seek to catch that by the hair, and pull it inside the mouth of the mother, and then insert one, or two fingers, and pull it towards you.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the opening of the mother is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the womb, then do not force it; instead, you should first minimize its swelling by applying hot compresses or similar treatments.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices, and follow up with the patient in warm waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on their side, try to tilt them as much as possible; and administer what we have mentioned regarding the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then make an incision in the leg, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause within the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have mentioned regarding the treatment of scars from the heat that arises from the fire.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs from the wound, stop it with strict water and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose belly was filled with dead children, and again over that fire another embryo is conceived, and again out of that dead fire comes another birth.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his leg; it swelled until it opened like fire, and he began to feel pain.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called upon to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should pause over them due to various causes and apply strong plasters, and extract an oss (bone), and after a few days, another bone will be extracted; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were bones of the fetus who is dead.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you will continue to treat the disease, extracting many bones, correcting their positions, and already healing in such a manner for a long time, alleviating a little of the pain.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be afraid that it is strange, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the patient, as the physician uses his hand for treatment gently.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the jaws are curved, with two cutting edges on both ends of the feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this forceps should be made to be very subtle in its grip, and can be crafted from ebony or wooden sticks.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each stick should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and their margin at one end should be a finger's width, with a length of half a palm; in the middle part of the sticks, there should be two fixings made from the same sticks, whose length is equal to a palm and a little less, and whose breadth is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are to be placed in the mouth of the hernia so that it opens as you apply the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of tough wood or iron, according to the strength of tweezers.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the extreme case, two additional parts can also be used, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is about two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the hernia, you should lay the patient down with their feet hanging, opening what is between their thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument, similar to shears, according to the quantity you want from the hernia's mouth, as long as the meter indicates that it's enough.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vertigo which the ancients spoke of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing which is used to propel the process:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as described, which focuses on the greatest problem:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps with teeth at the end, also when using, and sometimes it is made long as per this form, also when using, which has teeth similar to a sawtooth with which it cuts and penetrates.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Methods of healing rarely:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The method of incisions without a spur:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The method of double incisions without spurs:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps with teeth that close in which the head of the child is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A type of spatula with two ends, one of which is used to separate the head:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when the number of their species is multiplied and they are properly prepared for use, then they become lighter in handling and more useful to the artisans and to people in general because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the secondine (a medical term for a type of tissue or structure, possibly referring to a specific part of the body).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of childbirth is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, if they exhale outside, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, take a blade and pierce the cover at a point, then place in the mouth of the mother herbs soaked in warm water and ginger, fennel, licorice root, chamomile, and cinnamon bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it until the vapor reaches the concave part of her mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And do as we have said, so that the second birth is brought about quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the Roman method of this treatment is followed and not abandoned, command the midwife to immerse her left hand in hot oil or an infusion of alder, then insert it into the anus and carefully seek out the second one, and once found, gently pull it out little by little; if it is attached to the mother's body, then insert her second hand as we have previously mentioned, and when she finds the second one, extract it slowly according to the prescribed method so that the mother does not suffer intense attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Begin by changing the position of the sides, right and left, as is easiest.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust the amount of attraction accordingly; for it will obey and resist adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's opening is narrow, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and herbal medication.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to do anything in excess during extraction, but know that what comes out of the hernia into the mother's mouth is a matter for women, and treat it with a mixture of herbs and tetracycline; for this will eventually putrefy, dissolve, and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it appears, there is a high noise from the liver to the head and stomach, which causes the patient's suffering; and then know that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used fumigations of nasturtium and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and postnatal bleeding:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Make an incision or a tear.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine end of the tool should be in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoke should be restricted above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke is consumed, and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the cure of the unpierced child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children have this, and the anuses of these infants are not pierced, which is already slightly closed and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful not to touch the feces.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully tend to that paste until it is calm.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of it becoming blocked, apply pressure on the trail using a catheter for several days, and hold it when the child wants to pass it.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that the oppression in the anus occurs for the formation of a plague or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with water and lead as we have said regarding treatment and plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas that have formed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that form in the anus exude a foul-smelling, thick fluid, which can be seen protruding from the rectum or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or ulcer.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that contraction is old and due to the flow of moist white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate from them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is expelled from them through the exit and by their pus; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exiting, and very often they are filled with vermin.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And regarding those fistulas, some are found in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the nose of the scrotum.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And for the case where the fistula is found to penetrate into the anus but not exit, you should insert a thin, sharp probe or iron into the anus, and attempt subtle traction on the fistula when it is not too tight.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that area, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the stiffness or hair in the proper place.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of these, nor do you detect any cause for discharge or swelling, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you should cease treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from that area and the prohibition of its use until the location is healed by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that the stiffness penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the circulation; and it causes putrefaction at all times; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it healed by unguents.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating ulcers, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those requires work and patience from skilled doctors on whom they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I have advised you, and what you have already experienced.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the disease moves between your legs over its joints and raises the patient's legs within, the parts are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then attempts to insert lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, knowing the place where the attempt should be made.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert your finger deeply into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the attempt in the finger already has made itself open to penetrate, or if you feel something between the finger and that flesh, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because there is no cure in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it heals certain people suddenly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And regarding the treatment by which one hopes for rapid improvement in the patient, that is to use subtle cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above, and introduce this ignited thread into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those flesh tissues attached to the fistula, which are similar to a quill of downy hair, have healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then, wrap those with calgue (ganglions) in bandages until all those tissues that are attached heal, and treat the affected flesh with medicinal ointments that nourish and strengthen it; if it heals well, that is good; otherwise, it will not heal at all through any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters and does not penetrate deeply enough to reach the base, and between that and the attempt there is a space filled with flesh or bone, and the fistula is in such a way that it opens on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and watch as the attempt dries too; once the attempt has dried, it is released and removed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated meats that are assembled like a tube of quill pen and not torn from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those meats, then the best action is to use a clean instrument either cauterized with fire or acute medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts both openings: it suits the attached meats and severs the pus from the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then tend to those wrapped in bandages or bound by cause within that area, and take care of the plague with hot, hard flesh-engendering and consolidating treatments.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines that involve stopping and cutting; when the healing is already restored, it is free from recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert a small finger into the anus and inquire about that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the attempt and between you and it is visibly infected or of flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: either by cauterization as mentioned earlier; or by drying out the affected area to achieve its cavity so that you can insert certain remedies; and do not make a complete amputation because it would prevent you from inserting the probe containing the pus, and you might cause further damage to the patient's will; and take care of it as we have said for it to heal well; or elongate this veil and drain the pus from within close to the anus, as mentioned earlier, or try another attempt or use another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats which are in the section you can access through incision; and make every effort to restore the entire wound through incision, and if the pus opening on top does not heal, and the fistula remains open at the anus, it will become lighter due to the disease.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus near the surface of the body and on the margin of the anus, then take the probe of the perforating extremity, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert yourself into that wound wrapped in cloth or around those; then, insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is penetrating the margin of the anus very deeply, then extract the wound from there, thus inserting the probe into the anus; extract the end of the wound and align both ends, then stretch each one, leaving it for a day or two, and when you again insert the wound into the flesh, be sure to do so between the two extremities of the wound, which are separated.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then apply a cure for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either with heat or with a sharp object, since it is not for you to incise the wound; and then apply a cure for it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is sharp and one edge is not sharp, so as not to cut unnecessarily when you use it.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the stitching of hemorrhoids where there is bleeding during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways, either they are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are with the skin like ragged grass.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the fever runs from them at that time, it is one, hot, very intense, and in the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are very intense in the ends (of the body) often correspond to a few humors with a low moisture content, from which citrus-colored or slightly feverish blood continues to flow, and they depend on the body's color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is within the chest is to order the patient to rest and press, between when the chest burns and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend yourself with hooks or what you have at your disposal, and return those things to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks are not held in those parts due to their moisture and softening, then take those as rough cloth or leather or woolen threads, remove them with your fingers, and then cut those and sprinkle some powdered herbs over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those at the place of cauterization, or cauterize them as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then lacerate the malady with lances where there is a small bite, wash it with water that is in the wound and which hinders the hernia's exit more lightly when the malady presses.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are external in the buttocks, their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your finger, or those with a horn, and cut them, and then attend to them with water as mentioned above until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	For those who are skilled in incision, here is how to perform suture according to this method: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into an needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from their positions above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, stretching them laterally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, tie the thread, and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this continuously, leaving none of them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place your weight on the linen cloth dipped in hot oil or wax; press it onto the wound and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that inside the wound; and when it heals, treat those with ointment or other remedies until they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Various occasions of accidents occur due to the drying up of fissures or due to constriction from nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these are old and no longer effective in that medicine, you will find that you press those with the point of a spatula or with your finger into wet wounds to drain the pus from them, which prevents their hardening; and then treat those until they have hardened.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should stop those parts that are inflamed and painful, as the first enters, and take care of those that need to be healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The cure for hernia is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a red bulge in the body, similar to a knucklehead, and it is felt throughout the body but more particularly in the joints of the feet and legs, and precisely through those pains, you should attend to it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so, you should incise what is in the region of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its attachment, and then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned above in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	May it be a small, sharp, round ulcer raised on the surface of the body, and spots are often seen in children's bodies.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or open it with a sharp instrument within the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they have been eradicated with the instrument that you have mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May it be a small, hardened or rounded lump on the body's surface that itches and when pressed, feels like a mosquito bite, and it is widespread throughout the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from an oak or a viper, and make it strong, and press it onto the mosquito within the circle of the needle's points; then, turn your hand over the needle as you pierce what is in the mosquito's path, and place it on the flesh, and eradicate the mosquito from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make this as a tube of silk or iron in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforated), wrapped around itself so that the appearance of it is preserved and the revolution of that one is avoided.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned above in the cauterization of a thorn in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give cryotherapy.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cryotherapy is done with silver or iron or silk that has been melted and molded; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those used, for the cryotherapy administered to young children should be small; and for those whose anus are sensitive or painful, the cryotherapy of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The method of making a large and few cuts:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the bag should be wide according to this method, and it is distinguished where the bag is attached in the same way with various times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of it is placed below, which enters into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), moving with subtlety; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel depends on the thickness of the rays and more specifically a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of bladder of an animal or of sheep's skin are paused, and its length is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it is perforated through many channels in the same way as it is twisted; and if the space between the channels is thick, then that should be considered.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert a strong, sharp knife into these passages, whether they are closed or open; adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in position, tighten it firmly around the patient's crotch between two strong constrictors, and then apply the cautery to each passage: The quality of cauterizing these is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the severity of the illness, and be careful not to cut too deeply or too superficially.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then have the patient lie on their back, raise their legs up on supports, and place a cushion under them, over which they should rest their body, either on men or a bedpan; apply the tip of the cautery to oil or egg albumin or a paste of fenugreek or similar; insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take hold of the bag and squeeze it twice, exerting force so that everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the cautery and the patient should raise their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that applying heat to the pain of stomach solutions and vomiting helps it, then use the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or fistulas bleeding, then use a gentle heat and the cauteries whose tips are made for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Treatment of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already mentioned in the discussion of the treatment of plagues what is suitable for the body, and you have thus given the cure for those with great pain and using medicines according to their strength.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are produced by the plagues and according to the place on which the plagues fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plague spreads are also due to the breaking of stones, or incision of space or of skin, or striking with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring about sudden illness.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Plagues that are in the places of the body may also be like plague which strikes on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the chest, and similar to those members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain plagues, to stop that reasoning and regulate about other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the pressure of stone or something similar, and you have already squeezed the neck as much as possible and it is a great pain and you fear the progression of the malady with the formation of abscesses, then you should immediately perform a cerebral puncturing and drain the fluid according to the quantity of virtue (it) contains, unless there is any other cause prohibiting cerebral puncturing, especially if the abscess that has formed from the headache is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And cerebral puncturing is the opposite of the previous treatment; and pay attention to the patient's state of rest, diet, and avoid heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If, however, any cause prohibits drainage, then reduce the diet and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And focus on the malady; if it develops into a cautious abscess, apply hot oil or wine in which a cloth has been steeped to it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the septicaemia, rest over the wound, if it is fresh and its pus and the air have not changed the powder that I will tell you to apply properly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, rest on some poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or made by a sharp object and the edges of it are not well adjusted for healing due to lack of proper care, then adjust them with sutures as I will tell you about the suture method.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed bone and tendon, and it is not a deep one but rather a small suspended one, then incise it and properly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the area of concern, and order for the patient to abstain from foods that are harsh: fruits and vegetables that are hard and similar in texture to them, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, you will cut off all the rotted parts and remove them, then take care of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues involve an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not drained by medications, then you should investigate the artery. If you find one that is not incised, you will cut it with a knife or tie it; and if cauterization is required to prevent the pus from draining while the infection is being treated, do so.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, their cause is often slight; so you sprinkle over them this powder, for it hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is as follows: mix together one part olive oil from crushed sesame seeds, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts ground, unextinguished ash; thoroughly grind and sift it all, fill the plague with it, and tightly wrap it to ensure it adheres, then coagulate it with the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is in that state so that the medicine does not escape until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times, it can be treated alone with cautery, when there is no fever or dragon's blood present.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is also performed on great plague sores when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and only recent ones with fresh blood, whose air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not understood to be in the position of this powder, but instead, treat them as we have said, by pausing over these blisters with a mixture of vinegar and honey, or pause over the pores of the earth's order mixed with water and honey until they are cured; and then treat those with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture of the bone occurs in a small place, then you extract it with your hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And now, I will tell the cure for skull fractures that are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the collarbone.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the fracture occurs in the collarbone, its treatment is not different from other fractures; nor is it as complex as a skull fracture.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the collarbone are injured, then, since it is a nerve, treatment should not be aggressive but rather focus on avoiding harm to it as if it were poison, using things like vinegar and similar substances that soothe and do not irritate the nerves or cause tension.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment to the pain without first understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity leads to the brain, which is the source of all the body's members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with lighter medications, it is also washed with hot water, sometimes with olive oil or not, and rubbed while washing with hot water and other herbs according to this method, and moistened with humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is severe, then apply a suture, or tighten the edges of the wound, and once it is healed, take care with powders inside.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the pain is deep or there is pus in it, and a severe abscess has formed, then perforate it at the most painful point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the pain an artery is already incised and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if that is necessary to stop it from causing more harm.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already incised the spinal columns of the chest or entirely, having saved the collar bones' veins, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the rib cage and do not touch it; equalize it and return it to its natural shape, and then stretch it gently with decent tension, leaving it for a few days; and take care of it with poultices in which there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the infection has already taken hold in the bone, then probe it and if there are any fragments within, extract as many as you can; leave what does not seem infected until the plague has dissipated, separated and removed from it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the infection is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the infection has caused a fistula, then treat it with the water from which the memory of the cure will come, appropriately in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the neck or similar, when pain strikes between the shoulders and is felt in space or at the edge or with a lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or a sword that has pierced them, and they show deep penetration, then consider more seriously if the plague has an air of toxicity when the patient's condition worsens; then you will know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the plague is recent, then you should apply powder to it in the first hour; do not press too hard so that the swelling does not remain in depth and return to the heart, but rather apply a more attractive ointment, and wipe it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you do not have an ointment, then apply a cloth cut from the affected area to draw out what comes from moisture; and make the patient rest on the plague so that what is in it flows properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the disease has passed three days or more and does not cause spasms or tremors in the heart, nor constriction of the arteries, and other good dispositions follow, then you will know that the illness is cured; and from there, treat it with cool applications and other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the disease is prolonged and still open, then you will know that a fistula has formed; so treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the disease is due to an incision of the skin or cartilage, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it as follows: with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already taken hold in the bones, and you have already made incisions in the flesh, then press the disease and extract the affected parts if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them as they are, for the disease may spread if you try to remove them.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental diseases in other parts, the youth (or treatment) in cure is similar to what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal diseases.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the stomach is either great, or slight, or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For severe cases, the intestine or hernia's sac and nerves are visible, so their intrusion is made carefully, and the suturing of them requires great skill and subtlety.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for minor disruptions, it is difficult to reduce them by another method, and I note that their return to the cavity is more difficult if you do not insert them into their place immediately, as they open and swell, making it difficult to insert them.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is halfway, for in that there is no difficulty in reducing the hernia, as it is difficult in both the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are suitable for sutures in other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures communicate with other diseases, but nevertheless, they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it is said that when the disease is small and there is no cause of hernia from within, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the narrowness of the disruption as we have mentioned, or when the hernia has come due to inflation from the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when this occurs, it is necessary that you wash the affected area with a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water, or use water containing vinegar, salt, and spices, and apply it to the hernia until the swelling subsides.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, they use vinegar, which helps in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the swelling is resolved, then moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of aloe and marshmallow, for this alleviates its pain due to a slight cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the pain persists after this treatment, cut open the hernia using a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the initial treatment is better when it does not involve cutting, and there should be no concern about drying it out completely, nor should it be deprived of nourishment.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	In one part of the acute torsion, and in the other part not acute, and at the fine extremity, it is not that the subtlety of the cut be sharp, but rather obtuse a bit.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the illness has intensified and the hernia has protruded, it is necessary to return it to its reduction according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on that part, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the rupture is extensive, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must raise the head and feet higher than the affected parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must pause your intention and consideration at that point so that the part affected by the illness is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is that you must administer this in great pains and in milder pains as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in smaller pains, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, holding it with your hand, adjusting the edges, and uncovering from one point to another to see if any cause is found for the rupture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count one according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it at the end of the rupture from the middle finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid inserting the needle into both ends of the thread, but rather let it penetrate from the other side; thus you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases join both parts together, and add the two edges of the wound with a decent stitch; lay the thickness of your finger on it and insert another needle through it, just as you did with the first; do not stop doing this for the needles until you have filled all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, for the thin needles pierce the flesh slightly; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, therefore it is necessary that they be both medium and thin in thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of the wound at once, so that the flesh is not pierced too deeply and the injury heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures should not be too long, so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then you should cut the ends of the needles off so that they do not lacerate the patient during their sleep; and place over the sutures powdery substances from all sides, which will hold the ends of the needles; and remove them when you know that the wound is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of stitches are most conveniently done with needles in any manner for small wounds, since it is enough to sew them with one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is as follows: it is because you administer a suture to all four limbs, from the thigh and both limbs of the body, at once, with an needle in which thread is tightly wrapped, in a manner that suits both fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four limbs, withdraw the needle from that end of the thread by which you began, so that the thread retracted draws the wound closed and the suture is like a second stitch with which the bandages are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each suture, maintain the quantity of the thickness of the said thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture heals men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And I have carefully sewed up the wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of the main plague, about two palms from the opening of the hernia, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part to its cavity where the hernia had been for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound became consolidated within fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and it healed; and then I watched over him for many years, and he returned to his former state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not heal; yet by a miracle of God, as you would not cure him with any ointment or medicine, I placed my hand on the wound twice a day and washed it daily with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell of two kinds of sewing, according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And so you begin to stitch the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And as the needle penetrates the wound and passes through according to its direction and length in all parts of the body, leave the tip of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; and make the other end of the thread pass from inside to outside at the other end of the cut.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the first penetration, make another penetration in that end of the wound from outside to inside; leave the tip of the thread on this side, and insert the needle into the other end of the cut from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make another penetration with the needle that you use to penetrate the thread into the wound, at the end of the sight within which all of it will penetrate.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then it begins to draw this medicine from the side where it has entered, and takes it back into that vein and aligns the extremity of the hypodermic needle that is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and draws out that one from the vein which is on its part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then again, and continue doing this until you have treated everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of sewing is that you sew with a needle to which hair is attached, thus sewing the flesh; so you sew the hypodermic one time from the part of the end of the vein, and then you continue to sew until it is completely closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of sewing, which is truly worthy of mention, and this one is spoken of by doctors, is that you sew it with a second thread by which some physicians sew it, adding all parts to its proper part according to nature; and apply the end of one part of it to the other end of it, and this is done as you have been taught.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Ensure that you hold the needle at the end of your sight, aimed towards your own body, and penetrate it through the opening inside that joint, leaving two ends of the cipher; then turn around the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn around those parts, making some penetrate from inside out through the opening in two ends of the joint other than the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common light stitching, and it's a stitch of which one remembers preceding.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they might say, the stitching of the belly is rectified with two needles; so you insert a thread into some of these, beginning with the needle from which you should start, and make it penetrate through the other side according to the stitching of those whose hearts are intertwined.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the abdomen, closing it becomes more difficult than with other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment of plague should be judged according to other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which is because when you discover a new plague with its sore in front, the air alters it, and you return the intestine to its place, and sew it up and treat it properly, then you should pay attention to that powdery flesh.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then you should focus on the pus that is present, making it hard and causing the flesh to turn black, and let it be solid and heal; and treat it accordingly as with other plagues until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have any medicines at hand, then focus on these as soon as possible, since it begins to feel hot, red, and swelled, and changes color twice a day, just as you have been taught, until it heals, for you should not need other types of treatment with such simple plagues.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the infection may spread to the vital members, then cover them with a woolen lion in oil of good quality or olive oil, and place it in the area between the angles and leave the sleeves open.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, as these are signs of urgency, then you should apply a cold compress of black vinegar, especially if the hernia has been opened and the intestinal wall is protruding into the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one originating from larger intestines has a lighter chance of healing compared to the one in the smaller intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague occurring in it; this is due to the great number of veins present there, the magnitude of the hernia, the subtlety of the body part affected, and its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the illness is the fabric, and you obtain that raw, reduce it according to your recipe by which you reduce hernias generally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been left in the space and has turned red or black, then you should tighten the bandage over the area affected by it, so that pus flows, for within the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you cut what is another part of the bandage, and place two extremities of the bandage outside the infected area, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it should be removed, along with the fabric's contraction and the plague's discharge.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so you may see one who was previously plagued by it in their abdomen through the use of lances, and the plague was from the right side of the stomach, an old plague with fistulas, and treatment involved managing and ventilating it.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the cure of the patient, even if it was not confirmed in their healing, but continue to apply that which brings heat to the wound and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you see the location consolidated, pay attention to the disease that afflicts him from the accident of evil in his belly; do not attempt anything for this ill-fated accident and break up his healthy dispositions by eating and drinking, and then immerse himself in water and exercise himself as he wishes.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones say that when this plague in the intestine is small, it should be tied according to this manner: take a large needle; adjust both lips of the plague and place a needle from those that keep the mouth open over both lips of the plague; then as he takes hold of those and tightens his mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle close to the first, and do not stop this from making needles one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return it, compressing and healing it; and detach those appendages of the hernia inside until the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia may be a thin, fine thread made from animal intestines, finer than a needle; so take the end of these intestinal threads, stripped bare, and approach the end of it to a thread wrapped around a needle, and insert this thread through the hernia, and return it to its place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the hernia is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it requires a delicate approach, as it is not a simple cure but a complex one.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every wound and abscess that forms due to aging and becomes chronic, develops into a ulcer that does not heal and persists for a long time, is universally called a fistula in any part of the body, and we call it this disease "ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula, in truth, is a closed, hard, white substance to which pain is not associated, and it has a hollow space similar to that of a cavity caused by external injury; for this reason, it is called "ulcer," that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In some cases, the ulcer is moist, which causes swelling; and in a short time, the moisture is absorbed, leading to pain.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce, thick or thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already prepared it as described in the division when you mention the wounds, know that any ulcer that does not heal or is not on bare flesh is due to one of these causes: among which one is either a lack of blood flow in the body; or malice within it; or because between it and the lips there is hard, prohibitive tissue preventing the natural growth of flesh; or it is of excessive weight; or because that ulcer itself becomes putrid and the matter that is mixed with it is of bad quality; or because the remedy is unsuitable for its cure; or when corruption spreads in the region, and it becomes a pestilence; or due to the property of the region, as is the case in Zaragoza, where difficult digestion of ailments is encountered and recovery from abscesses takes time by nature; or because there is a bone or many bones involved.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cures with medicines are described in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so, know that you should apply the cure for a fistula caused by surgical operation with your hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skull, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints composed as such by the hand and foot, and from there they open near the main member and similarly.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas, those following this manner are from the difficult illnesses of which there is no cure, and any occupation or treatment is a result of labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If it is one of these fistulas with depth such that it does not reach the locations mentioned above, and you expect and confide in its healing, and you wish to come to knowledge of it, then take care or a knife, and if the fistula follows a straight path, probe it carefully.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then carefully investigate it with a delicate probe, because the weight of its body being raised and curved away from the twist will help correct the curvature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not possible for you to treat it with attempts.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then you should crystez (sterilize) the orifices for their horrific nature, because the moisture by which you cleanse them is necessary for cleaning other orifices and their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then you should carefully inquire, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or immediate, or if it is a fistula with an extremely horrific odor that occupies all of your strength, requires all of your questioning, by which you question the illness, and you attribute the pain to your compression with your hand over the area, and similar things regarding the symptoms and accidental causes in the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all of those causes with careful attention, you will proceed to treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you consider now if the fistula appears near or in a clean place, far from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or one of the places that you have at hand, and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula as it is described in the narrative, stop what is in that flow and from corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the orifice of the flesh, or from its parts and similar, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rule, then you should incise it into the bone as far as possible, and thoroughly clean it of all corrupted flesh; and then apply some wrapped up in acute medicines, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have understood with your hand.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this until some times have passed, so that the acute medicine corrodes everything that is soft in the hollow of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with bandages that promote healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of a fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to be certain of this, then examine and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not prohibit any cause from veins or nerves or from the main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then cleanse that part where the corruption is present until it is completely healed; and apply care to it with something that promotes healing.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and pus flows as it was before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and so uncover it again and carefully make the incision on it and perform the cleansing of it with the last remaining strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is sane, good; otherwise, you will know that this corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore to you there is nothing to do but cleanse it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, it may be possible to remove it with delicate forceps suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause for concern regarding your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If anything causes you difficulty due to moisture, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then incise these bindings or flesh if they are here, and carefully extract the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the area where the pain is located, and leave it there until the pain passes, ensuring that this is in the vicinity of those bones, flesh, and ligaments, and watch for any signs that the pain becomes consolidated, so that the section you have incised in your operation does not become restricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	While not a perfect match, here is a line-by-line translation based on the given context and linguistic cues:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the thigh or leg bone or similar, and what is corrupt from it is only the appearance of it, then quickly treat it as soon as that darkness and corruption are contained, and then restore the illness.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the corruption of the bone has spread widely and the infection has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to cut out that part completely from the area where the corruption has taken place, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you overcome a man in his thigh so that he supports you at every turn and assists in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the swelling originates from within the body, affecting the material inside the flesh, resulting in an abscess or a significant abscess, and it is not caused by an external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time extends until the abscess is formed due to the errors of doctors, and it will be filled with moving matter, and its cure is delayed until the leg is fistulated, and it makes in it horrible wounds that can cause necrosis and body humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus, after many years of treatment by doctors, who focus not on the essence but on the symptoms, you will still be called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he saw the leg of the patient and the matter flowing from these horrible wounds, spreading throughout his body; the skin of that man was completely rigid, and its colour was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so he inserted the probe into one of these wounds and reached the bone with the probe.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then he carefully examined all the wounds and found these pernicious things spreading throughout the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut and incise one of these openings where I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten, hard, and corrupted, and already had a piece of the thigh corrupt, penetrated into the mesenteries.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I secured what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I thought that it was not the bone but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I carefully paused the restoration of the disease with restorative medicine for a long time, but it was not solidified.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I iterated and further discovered the bone according to the initial discovery, and found continued corruption within the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will address what appears to me as that corruption, and then I will make you do the perforation for its cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you will discover it again and do not continue to cut the small bone particularly and perforate its restoration, but rather once you have incised around a palm of it, you extract its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is somewhat consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the arrangement of its frailness and due to the lack of patience in enduring it and fear of death, as it falls into a state of weakness at all times due to excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, healing is complete, and nothing takes the place of the hard bone; its arrangement in the body brings good health and returns its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and does not cause any opposition in walking or harm due to any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If a bone protrudes from the body, when you discover it, follow this manner: take lint and tightly wrap it around the end of that protruding bone, command someone to extend it; then place the thicker lint over the raw flesh left by the bone, and wrap it close to the flesh so as to draw the flesh away from its position, and uncover the flesh in the area you want to incise, so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or a table beneath the bone properly, for when you do this, the saw is not prohibited from cutting through the corrupt flesh without harm.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be sure to make the incision over the corrupt area little by little; for if it is in the hollow of the corrupt bone and does not appear in its sensation, then force the saw another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it is one continuous split with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or at a distance from it, then uncover the flesh from all sides; and place a stick beneath, and saw first the part with the corruption until the other split continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, you should incision that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues to another part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be treated rationally but ingeniously.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and open that up, and remove it according to some arrangement possible to you, and in such a way ingeniously correct any curvature, so long as it does not cause you pain or affect nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which incision tools and the cutting of these bones are very dependent on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety, size, and rarity of those, and their hardness; so it is necessary that you prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you have need; when you possess great knowledge and long experience in the ways of this art, and testimony of the methods of various ailments, for you will already have learned what is suitable for it among all instruments for every ailment.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your practice, to further refine your skills and experience in treating others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	The shape of the ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be in the shape of a star's claw, and its points are shaped like the spikes on a thistle.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to apply this only when the joints' heads are clogged, or when the aperture is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger scissors among others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller scissors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the broad scissor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of another saw, appropriately curved and with sharp teeth, the blade made from a strong material, and the handle of the sword-like member cut down.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The form of scissors with a concave shape:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The form of other scissors, more subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The form of other scissors with an extremely curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The form of small scissors resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The form of chisels that cut through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The form of other smaller chisels:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of another chisel; this one resembling a ray, with a saw-like tip, and is presented in various places for the purpose of cutting bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of the ray which is suitable for reason of him who is pierced by bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and seems to be capable of all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision of the extremity and of the lock of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or if the corruption is not treated with those remedies and the cure does not follow, then you should cut off that part of the body which no longer has any use, because it will only contribute to the spread of the malady, leading to death or serious damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black until it is cut, or if you can see the blackness within, then cut it from that part of the body where it has spread to all parts of the body; and thus make an incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it seems to be caused by the corruption of some poisonous sources, just as from a sea scorpion or a viper or a leech and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the bite is on the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it affects the hand, then cut off that part from the base of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it spreads into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you cannot do that, then incise the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads and the joint is affected, then at that point the patient dies; and to treat another cause of this in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And it seems to do for the foot when corruption occurs in one part of the foot, then you incise that into one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold of the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it can enter the toe joint, then you incise the leg at the toe joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then there is no cure for it other than dismissal, and you leave the patient to their fate, to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the point where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the area; then extend the instrument one ligament beyond the other, and extend the minister another ligament onto it; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without leaving any space wide enough for all the flesh to be exposed; and then cut or sever.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover it with a cloth of linen from all sides so that it does not touch the area, and bring to the patient an adjusted and clean wound dressing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powdery substances to constrict the blood flow; then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then attach the affected member with a suitable ligament, and treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to treat this man on his foot, this condition that you and I have agreed upon, which occurred due to the darkening of the skin on his foot resembling the burn from fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption, which occurred first in his toe, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And so that man prepares himself for this condition that he sees as the cure advancing to the member with the force of it that weakens from pain and the heat of the burn, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that condition of corruption has occurred in the big toe as indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And so it occurred to me, and I have pierced to reflect that superfluity with the water that I use for medicinal purposes, returning the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected, and we begin to go to another toe as we began on the big toe.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the doctor then incises my hand, and I do not want to do this hoping for the rebound of that superfluity, rather, you must be aware of the incision of the patient's dead hand, because the virtue of the disease was on the verge of death.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and forced me to prepare and incise his hand entirely, and he is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this story merely to help anyone suffering from this illness, but also to explain its cause and meaning, so that it may be understood according to its nature and treatment.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the cure of wounds and the quality of enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place becomes empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin over it remains intact, and is not affected by any posterior corruption, and does not press on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that corruption entirely affects a member, it is then called a fistula and not incurable.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is that you cut that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtile and made with cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption will not succeed through its last consequences, and if the cord has passed through the skin from front to back, then treat it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the breath they produce has an evil odor, then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made of oil and wine and heated coals, placed in a vessel, and sealed over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the intestine, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then remove that filth; do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the pain relieved.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	In some cases, enema with ash water can be used when this medicine is not available; take the ashes of wheat, put them in water, and mix well to prepare the enema which should be administered until the sinus is cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then an enema should be given with honey and water mixed with three parts of treacle, or wine and honey mixed; for honey purifies and cleanses, while wine causes the sinus to adhere, especially when excess of stings and dryness has been removed from it.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then apply a clister with water that helps bring forth flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyaphonic (a cleansing agent) and dissolve that oily matter and apply it with a styptic (to stop bleeding); or else, you can clisterize (use as a purgative) that same water with some medicines and apply others that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifices of the swelling are narrow in which the cannula of the clister cannot pass, then gradually widen them using a small iron, and place warm compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the orifices seem wide, then you should close them with stitches and leave enough volume for the clister to be adequately filled.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of the patient from which the arm emerges is elevated above them, dry it in the lowest place on them where the arm passes through, for when the arm is restricted within the depth of their chest, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the chest within the environment of the deepest bone, then pierce what you have prepared for the arm to pass slightly from there according to your will, so that no cause of restriction for the arm remains in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are gently applied to the chest according to what you want to extend, applying them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the chest; then, with scissors, cut in the right side of the opening of the chest at a distance slightly larger than the opening; and extend over another cloth of linen the amount of leon (a unit of measurement) according to the size of the opening, and place it there for some days until healing occurs, so that the arm's movement from him is not hindered and the cloth does not become too large.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	He who is over the wound of the sinus, which you keep moist at all times so that it draws out what is stuck in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material being discharged over the sinus wound has become adhered, or a strong adhesion forms, then at the fourth day, remove the bandage, dislodge the plague, change the dressing for another one, and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If it is a sinus that has created a long narrow space and the adhesion is firm, do not be anxious about it, for healing will occur of its own accord; for there are some people in whom new tissue grows in their wounds after a long time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a bruised arm is left for several days and the sinew does not adhere, then you know that the sinew is not adhering; if the adhesion of the sinew takes too long and this causes prolonged pain, then adjust through the use of medications, and if the medications are humid in their essence and virtue, dry them out with a specific ointment when there is an excess of moisture from additional treatment.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last method, which is used to cure it, is to take a specific ointment and dissolve it in warm oil, then apply it directly over the affected area, and repeat this treatment daily until it is cured.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work just as well, when there is no bruised arm, with specific ointment, especially if it is thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and burn them, crush them all and make a powder over the fire, then apply this on cloth and wrap it tightly around the affected area; and apply that with the ointment which you have noticed to be thick, and sprinkle that onto cloth and wrap it tightly.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And at times, they administer to him long-soaked and crushed lilies of the sky (that is, lilies of the sky) and fennel flour and centaury, and use these simples, strain them, sift them, and sprinkle over honey that has been reconcocted; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the pain persists and is not relieved by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the blood of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you treat it with fists, as it is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of wounds, burnt skin, and cuts added with finger incisions and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema that remains in the nail of the thumb or toe, and it strongly affects the other digits, and as time passes and its treatment is neglected, it either becomes a cauterized apostema or is corrupted, and pus flows within, consuming the root of the nail. It severely corrupts all of them, reaching the bones inside through which a foul odor emanates. The end of the affected digit turns black, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have treated the condition as we have described and do not find relief, then cut out with a knife all the excess that is pressing on the joint and apply a hot cautery to the wound nearby, for cautery helps in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is broken and the joint is healthy but the swelling from the joint pushes into the surrounding flesh, and it begins to hurt and inflame that part, then place a fine cut at the angle of the joint that is pressing on the flesh, push it aside and cut that flesh easily, and apply a poultice of healing medicines, such as anti-inflammatory salves, until all signs of the injury are healed; and take care to keep the area clean.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then cut out the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing where the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see corrosion and destruction in the said part, then you incise it in one of the bones according to its memory, and then treat it so that it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is a need for striking or cutting the fingernail due to intense pain, then you should begin by cleaning the area around the nail, and then with a sharp spatula, cut across the nail on its surface, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh that remains under the nail, because this will cause the patient intense pain and lead to the formation of excessive accumulated tissue at the site; and then treat that place to relieve the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of many people, is entirely flesh in some, entirely bone in others, or partially in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is the nature of them in some bones of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	He who is born in any particular place does not suffer from any specific pain, and he who is born with strong joints experiences gout more severely.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are fleshly by nature, the incision is light, and it is that you must insert the blade of a scalpel into its root.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	For he who is born with the root of the joint, healing is difficult; therefore, be careful about the removal of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of those born with such nuts, be careful to make an incision at the beginning with a sharp knife, cutting into the flesh around the bone, and then close it with a suitable cautery, ensuring that it heals well.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation that occurs between the joints, whether due to frequent use or by nature in those who lack such, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar conditions, therefore, be careful to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets, dipped in warm oil, so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until it is consolidated as desired.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if consolidation seems to occur in some part of the hand, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins, when they are varicose, are thick, twisted veins full of melancholy surplus fluid that appear in various parts of the body, especially in the legs, most notably in those who walk, work, and carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is appropriate that you administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and then draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of their ferulous limbs is according to two methods: one is to incise and remove that black ganglion, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick ganglion is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then the leg of the patient is tightly bound at the superior part of the affected area with a bandage, and the vein is cut at one, two, or three places along its course, and then the black ganglion is lifted with the upper part of the leg below it, and from there upwards, until all the amount of ganglion that you wish to remove and that is sufficient to alleviate the patient's condition is extracted.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then bind that one tightly, and order the patient to abstain from cold, black-generating foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their legs should be done in this manner: you who hold the leg of the patient, if there is hair on it, then dip it into water and soak the leg with lukewarm water until the swelling subsides and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised by intense activity, then do so without a bath while the member is still warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then tighten the string around the vein at the right of its course, either near the top or near the bottom, depending on where the pain is.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then loosen the string with cuts and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and the diagnosis of that disease, which you have seen to be darkening, must be made.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so, after evacuating and removing the string, you should examine that white area to see which string it is.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert your fingers into the space that is elevated and freed from the cord, and suspend it with a certain delicate touch.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut parallel to the first one, and carefully extract the cord from the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section, after the talon, and extract it while elevating it until it passes through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section among all of them, while ensuring that all are removed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not carefully extract and elevate it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle into it and tie it off and extract it, or insert your finger into the space and turn your hand over all parts where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut yourself; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and it will come back against the wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of that is completely removed, then apply to the affected area a mixture of wine and rosin oil and un-rosined oil, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twisting in which it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then cover that you make a cut on all parts of its twisting and at the places where it wraps around, and raise it up until it is entirely elevated.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein and not to injure it, for it will be difficult to raise it up, and use your prudence in that regard.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury which is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of the wound:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharp enough like other wounds and it does not have an acute extremity so as not to injure the vein; on the contrary, its great flexibility allows it to pierce the vein due to its subtlety, as we have said. It has a superfluous thickness on the surface.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries, as well as in the hosannas (or hernias) in Arabic lands and in the rear parts of Indian lands with little moisture and without grass or vegetation.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And a very small vein is generated in other parts of the body, besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of decay is such that it produces chains from within the body, serpents and worms and scabs and worms engendered between the chain and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending onset of gout is this: a sudden inflammation in the leg; then the place becomes swollen; and then the vein begins to leave from that place of swelling, which seems to be torn from the inside.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the onset of gout becomes apparent, you will then know to wrap around that part a piece of lead whose weight is like that of a dragon. Within the lead, place the affected limb, and let it hang from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever it occurs for some reason from within the body, wrap that in lead and know of it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, you then insert a sharp object into it and wrap it; but do not insert that which is raw until it comes out, for if you insert one while it's still raw, it contracts and goes inward into the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction in the place, and creating bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated additionally and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the patient's body, without leaving any cause for concern in their body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have reported that it extends to the length of their palm and fingers, and I myself have seen it reach as far as 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut open during treatment, insert the ray into its opening and pierce that long passage through the body, so that everything inside the matter can be evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then care for it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out most horrifically from each branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat it as we have said in the division and pay attention to what is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine disease in some countries, as it causes visible swellings in the animals and it is characterized by a small worm that is born between the skin and muscle tissue. It spreads throughout the body, gradually weakening and disrupting the muscles, especially in the legs until the worm breaks free.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which causes the formation of worms, serpents, roundworms, and hookworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared by the evil of these worms, for when they enter the body and rise to the head, they affect the brain, strongly shaking it and destroying it, which should be feared.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure and extract it, it cannot be done unless you understand its movement and appearance in relation to the body, and then you will grasp what is above it and what is left of it, and apply a strong compression and extraction over it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery at the place where it resides, and the main reason to be feared is the corruption of it, which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you attempt to cure it near the root, then tighten over the brow with strong pressure, and apply a dry compress, extract it; and take care that the illness uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the section regarding the treatment of illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nephritis in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You have been called to a village to see a sick woman, and upon examining her arm, you noticed a small inflammation in the vein at the elbow, which had burst an hour before. As it was oozing, you observed that the fluid seemed alive, moving from one place to another, almost like living silver.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then, he applied pressure to that place to stop the pain, and left it on for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And he repeated the same process on the other arm until it was healed.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I began to examine the whole body, as I had seen it, and was too amazed at the change of the disease and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many which cause extreme pain to be changed from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen this in the feet of a woman like this.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything but that the woman was old, with a dry body and exposed veins, and in this state, the sensation of that changed wind is felt.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward cure does not appear in those who have healthy and moist bodies with closed veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to treat them and the patient feels that pain, do not immediately appear with that medicine as we have said, but tighten your grip on that part and leave it slightly pressed and dry over that area until that air flow is restricted, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not recognize it by the symptoms in your feet, then cure that which causes exhaustion to the body and that which expels air, and bind those foul-smelling pills and serpent pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary according to their species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in those that have sharp points, and small ones, and concave, and dull ones, which are solid; and those with three angles, and those with tongues; and those with barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts where it strikes, it is classified in two ways: when the primary members are affected, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, joints, bladders, and similar organs; and so when you feel a catch in any of these members and it signals your impending death, which I will explain later, you must be aware to avoid extraction of that arrow from those parts where death is imminent, and when these symptoms do not appear, nor is the arrow hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that and cure the illness.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant (the body), when you feel an arrow in it that pierces the bone and arises from the base of the skull due to intense pressure, causing migraine, dizziness, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion in speech, and vomiting of bile, and often the word is severely cut off and the voice is destroyed; and there appears at the site of the illness a white humidity resembling powder, and pus-like liquid.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, if the arrow pierces the heart, so that it is near the left mammary gland, and you feel a hard pain where it is stuck, not a weak pain; and strongly feels the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and flows black plague pus, and there is a chill in the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; then you will know that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung will show pus-colored plague from the infection, and the veins close to the collarbone are filled, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they breathe heavily, and ask for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and there is great pain accompanied by groaning, and all the muscles of the limbs are not at their best.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, you will experience intense pain from the harmful food poisoning.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, causing a tear in the plague (or wound or hernia), there is little hope of recovery from removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and causes urine to leak outside, leading to severe pain in the patient, you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members (face, neck, chest, shoulders, hips, and legs) can also be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I would advise this to those who have seen the nature of these arrows, so that they may understand their impact on healing.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man an arrow strikes the lacrimal duct in the side of his nose, and it is extracted from him on the other side, leaving the bones of his auricle intact, and he is healed, and there is no damage to his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And they extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the bone of his nose, leaving the eyelid intact; the arrow was concealed and could not be removed from there, except for a small tip which remained attached to his skin, it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, one that kills lions without leaving any auricle.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no bad consequence for his nose.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And they extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had entered his gullet, and it was an Arabic arrow, the one with the auricle; then they incised between two guides, and the arrow was already immersed in his gullet; then they subtily removed it, and he was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man that had fallen into his belly, and thought that he would die from it; therefore, after having passed XXX days without any change in his condition, I incised the arrow and manipulated it, and he was healed, and no further harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And he brought a man in whom an arrow had penetrated his back, and the wound was deeply ingrained in him; after setting a fire nearby, he removed the arrow at the root of the injury.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And he saw a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her belly, and the wound was deeply ingrained within her, not changing in its condition, and the woman did not become troubled or affected by any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he saw another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face, and the wound was deeply ingrained, with the arrow broken but causing little to no pain, resembling these others.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extract the arrow from the man of the prince of the king that was embedded in the middle part of his nose, and had already tilted to the right side a little, and hidden was all the arrow.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the treatment of him soon after the arrow's embedding, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you carefully examined the arrow's infection; and then you inquired about that subtle attempt, not feeling it; but he felt a piercing sensation remaining behind his right ear, and thus you hoped that this piercing was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And you applied plaster to the place where it has an absorbing and digestive effect, trusting that this location will reveal itself to you so that you may locate the arrow's position, and dry out the infection there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be concerned about the location of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply the poultice over it for many days without incident; and as the wound heals between them, break up the swelling from the extraction of the arrow in intervals of many days until on one day you feel the arrow within its hole and reconnect it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should focus on treating the acute corrosive wound with specific medicines for many days until a fire opens up, and you should cool it, and try to remove the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the wound using that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I will spend time on it for intervals of time over four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound has healed and I can insert my fingers into it, I will persist in this way, without hesitation, then I will no longer search for subtle and clever methods, until one day I use clever devices to pull it out, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter, until I extract it; and then I will restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, and the disease became consolidated, and the malady was healed entirely, without any damage to it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that it gives this rule and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those others are not understood from the narrative nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans compare a little about what is said and much about what is absent; and from what is present, they find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter, or on the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is inserted or shot through the area where it enters, or proceeds from a fleshy place, is thrown and pulled out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it is weakened and the attraction and exit of it are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to your diet, leave it for a few days, then repeat the application of heat and movement each day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your diet for several days, then you must puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle point until the location where the arrow is stuck is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the skull bone and has pierced one of the brain's ventricles, and symptoms of those injuries appear, refrain from removing the arrow and leave it there until its presence is no longer felt for some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the brain, and the patient recovers after some days without any complications from those injuries, then apply your skill in attracting the arrow and its surroundings.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not obey to your attempts at extraction, then administer treatments along the arrow's path as we have recommended, and tend to the spot until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body and lodged in a sensitive area, then question the patient and if you sense any pain, use various stimuli to attract it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then pierce the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached that must be removed, carefully cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the means at your disposal; and devise something, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes possible to reduce them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, use torction with your hand and forceps from all sides until it yields; and with subtlety and care, so that the arrow is not broken and can be easily removed along with its tip.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it with your forceps, then leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the path of the arrow can be separated, and then repeat the procedure when the pain has subsided.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience difficulty due to bleeding, then administer what we have mentioned for treatment in its section.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be mindful of your skill in incising veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as much as you can, both for yourself and as recommended by others.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow in such a way that the disease is according to the figure by which you must aim the target of the arrow, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not within your ability, then administer what is within your ability according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Consider the arrows that are shot against the opposite side or have already pierced through any part on the outside, or become stiffened at the tip due to the pressure from below, and twist those; then place your hand over it; and according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it, cut it off; and throw it away, for it is of no use.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, cut your knife according to the direction of the arrow that pierces the bone, and deepen the cut until it exits, then remove it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not work, leave it for a few days and then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is within the bone, then push it towards the arrowhead.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft has fallen off and you want to apply force, insert a sharp object and, if it is hard, strike it with force into the hollow of the bone at the base of the arrowhead, then push it towards the arrowhead.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, push it firmly with a sharp object while entering it, as this will cause the arrowhead to recede due to that pressure.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must press all your concave flesh where it truly is, if you can do so, and tend to that area as best as you can.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it without difficulty, and it is possible for you to do so, then grasp it and pull it out, and be careful not to cut into veins or nerves, and treat the wound as needed until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used to extract arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a saw tooth, to grip the arrow firmly so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, large, small, and medium, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness, and the depth of its penetration, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the area affected.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of pushing out the concavity of this extremity with pain from outside so that the arrow's intrusion is removed from it and the pressure from inside is relieved.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The method of relieving a sore extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that the arrow's intrusion into the concave sagita is removed and it is pushed out of there.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venipuncture (vein cutting).
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for fleubotomy (vein cutting) of which usually flow blood, there are two pulsatile veins closest to the auricles, called the *carotid* veins; two appear on both temples; and two in the two lacrimal bones, called *lacrimal* veins; a vein prepared in the middle region of the forehead, one in the tip of the nose, and two veins at the nape of the neck; also, there are two veins on the upper lip, and two on the lower lip; and these are called the *alere* veins; and lastly, there are two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are considered, one is a cephalica, and it is the lateral vein; the people call it "the vein of the head", it is deaf, and it is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalica; they call that one the people "vein of the whole body", the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic axilla, and it is called "citillar", and they call those common people "the stomach vein"; the end of the arm, and it is paused on the fossa, and it is the one where phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears over the wrist by clear indication; and the savetelle, it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, and only in it are two curves.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is left at the curvature of the inner side of the lateral vein; the second is superficial, and its location is left at the camba of the domestic leg; and the sciatic vein, its location is left at the camba of the lateral vein; and on the camba there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are closest to the ears is for ancient cataracts, emigration, and inflammation and ulcers of the head and old malformations.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding should be as follows: it should be close to the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occipital region at the location of both veins with ample friction; then tighten the patient's collar with a bandage so that the two areas appear where the ears are located, precisely where the veins are closest to the head; and seek what is called the 'good cut', and if you feel the pulse of those veins as described, proceed accordingly.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the scalpel, which is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as necessary; and make the cut as deep as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten the bandages and leave that until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been preceded at the beginning of this book with the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflows in the limbs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the technique of performing a flebotomy on those parts depends on what you have learned: restrict the patient's collarbone until the two veins appear palpable by direct observation and it is clearly demonstrated that their pulse does not change; and then you will know you are successful.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the cord over the vein at its attachment as previously indicated, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument beneath it, and elevate the vein; and cut through it in the same way as you have done with the two other veins; and make the incision flow blood according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then, close to the site of the patient's hernia, place the mentioned bandage over the vein for an hour, and apply pressure to that area, and tighten it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now follows the remembrance of them, and from those, the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the release.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the application of phlebotomy to the vein in the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraines, and putrid wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy on the patient depends on what you have learned; so that the illness tightens its collar with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument named the "sucer" which is the shape of it.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the point at the prominent end of the sucker over that vein and apply pressure to it either by inclining or another manner, allowing the blood to flow according to the amount you desire, and then remove the puncture from the patient until the illness is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, the vein is opened wide through flebotomy, but it is not known that the flebotomy of acute extremity is also like other flebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and flebotomize according to the transverse, because the bone there is very strong and would break easily if the flebotomy were too subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Avoid the jugulation of the two veins that are the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to inflammation and itching in the eyes, as well as to facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the disease constricts the vein at a certain point, and then you make a small incision there, and you stand over the top of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy is made according to the transverse direction at a slight angle to the phlebotomy, as there is little flesh in the area; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then only a small part of its end should be cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then let the blood flow as much as is necessary, and press upon that side, and tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Phlebotomy on the nasal vein is effective for acute fever and severe headaches, and for facial pains and migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the disease constricts its vessels, and then you take hold of their nose with your left hand, and insert a subtle, long phlebotomy knife at the center of the nose according to straightness, as the vein does not appear sensitive here, and soon after the blood begins to flow.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure you complete the procedure of opening the vein little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then close it tightly for a night, as that will restore it more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the treatment of phlebotomy for both conditions should involve narrowing of blood vessels and beginning of healing, as well as alleviating severe pain and preventing destructive and corrosive ulcers with the help of potent remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these conditions is that the illness tightens each one in its place with adhesions; and the healer should be on top of the patient's head, and the patient should lie on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make phlebotomy on the vein deeply but gradually; and extract blood according to season or as much as necessary for treatment; and do it similarly on the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then clean the ligament and tighten both veins with gentle pressure to prevent further inflammation, and place a bandage over the wound once the pain has subsided.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the juvenile aspect of phlebotomy for varicose veins, it compares to small apices and pustules in the mouth and inflammation of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers located on the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these cases is to cease the illness immediately, tighten the vein's collar with a bandage, then carefully turn aside the lips and locate two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; each should be identified by their darker appearance due to the small size of the veins in that area; and then incise them with a precise incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt on your part, and you do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the larger one among them, and consider the presence of pus as an indication of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it appear as if there are two veins on top of their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is often necessary to cut both veins that are located on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The cutting of both veins located on the tongue, when done properly, is called phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal parts, which are found in the throat, as well as for issues with the uvula and mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy is such that it follows the disease among your fingers before the sun, raises the tongue, keeps an eye on the space beneath the tongue, from one side where the vein is and from the other side, and the color of each turns towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to finish with your hand in phlebotomizing those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flayed in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and the flaying of their veins is done in two ways, either by using a fleabite with a myrtle or olive twig in a delicate manner; or cutting them with a scalpel, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for amputation, and these have special cuts and subtleties according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle fleabite:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	it cuts the width of the vein as it passes, and it opens the concave veins full of thick substances by proceeding apparently grossly, and to those containing thick blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive arteriotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of lesser depth and more delicate extremity, and it is suitable for the flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the jugular vein flebotomy, which is one of three veins, extracts blood from the illnesses left in the throat and neck, and from this, the legs and abdomen are purified.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to carefully preserve that vein and be wary of it, because if he deviates or misplaces the puncture of the flebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause bleeding of blood, so it is important not to flebotomize that vein with a sharp instrument, but rather to cut it gently.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basil vein does not appear by clear indication, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to another, or seek some of its branches; or perform a flebotomy in its place at the end of the arm, because that one is clear; and carefully cut it with a gentle instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform an arteriotomy on the leg, first cover in front of the narrowing of the arm that you touch the area until you know the location of the pulse, and then press over it tightly; and bring the arm close and dry the vein by making a concave section for arteriotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid the percussion for any space in the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, by strengthening the ligament, an inflation in the place that you have pressed tightly, then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the blood flow in the arteriotomy as with a bell of a child, and the blood is thin and clear, then know that it is from the artery's blood; and immediately cut and press on that place for a long time; and soon after stopping the pressure, if the bleeding has ceased, tighten the arm and leave it be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch the patient from the release of their moisture, and be greatly wary of them, and do not harm that for some days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the vein is not severed and you do not have any appropriate medicine for it, then you cut into the artery if you see that it is constricted; because the end of the vein contracts and the vein is severed; or you take a piece of lint and tie that around it, and tighten it over the spot of the vein with tape, and leave it for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the vein is severed, then it is good; and if not, treat that with the water as mentioned, in remembrance of the location of the powder where the severed flow of blood occurred.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the vein from the patient is difficult due to the position of the affected area and the possibility of ligament attachment in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware the phlebotomist who is overzealous in the phlebotomy of a patient, for there is a nerve involved; and therefore, when he locates the nerve during the phlebotomy procedure, it will cause stupor, making healing difficult, and leaving strong patients unsanctioned. This nerve causes movements that are felt; and if it is hidden from some men and appears subtle and not manifest, then you must pause the phlebotomy with which you are cutting into the vein and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy with olive or myrtle, it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind an artery or a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is still advisable for you to remember that in phlebotomy, you must not puncture the top of the lizard's head solely, but seek a lighter place, and be careful not to notice it, unless it is plagued by the initial percussion that precedes phlebotomy on that spot a few times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, a strong fever may occur in certain individuals when not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but you should pay no attention to that particular fever.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of phlebotomy from that and the accidents associated with it are factors, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translates to: "The first of these is what you must know that amputation of the leg is only administered in the interest of health and with hope for recovery, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the groin, namely: the cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and amputations are carried out at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, when signs of edema appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And amputation should be performed on the third day or, if it is the first pus, three hours after the operation.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Amputation may be performed when it is deemed convenient and necessary, day or night, at any time and in any place.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is known that a child should not be subjected to amputation before the age of thirteen, and a pregnant woman should not undergo amputation unless it is after the fourth month of pregnancy, and the elderly, those who have already passed sixty years, should not be amputated.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be freed from fluid retention in any way, it is necessary to cleanse their bowels in advance with a lion's clister, if there is a significant gap retained, so that the veins do not throw off the excess fluid during the flebotomy of the purifying bowels, which are healthy, and they do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not be subjected to flebotomy if they are naive, ignorant, or excessive in eating and drinking, nor should they avoid illness or madness while this treatment is being used, nor should it be performed when there is a drop in the body's strength, as it may cause colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, increased urination, difficulty in movement, work, exercise during meals or vigils, or any other cause that weakens the vitality, whether of the body or the animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is necessary to consider the subtlety of humors in relation to this, if the swelling is caused by heavy foods, drinks, and medications, then these must be avoided as far as possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse him in a bath, unless some cause prevents it or if there is exercise that should be done so that the swelling is reduced.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the bloodletting from the patient's leg at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And pierce that foot to be watched on that day from all animal misfortunes, as there is pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as there is excessive work and suffering similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his side, have the causes be present of the use of which herbs are customarily used by men for aromatics and perfumery and as balms and similar, according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And have the flebotomist follow on another cushion that is softer than the one of the patient who was to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the fluctum-cauterizer two or three times; then tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And whether the contraction is severe, where the contraction is unequal, or the contraction is excessive, then it hinders the flow of the blood; or if it is for relaxation, and then it hinders the movement of the blood entirely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the contraction, ensuring that whoever has been fluorinated rub their hands together between each other until the veins are swollen and visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the flebotomist applies their flebotomy tool to a small amount of anti-corrosive oil specifically; they place their left hand's digit on the vein, slightly shifting it to create a slight bulge, and to release the pressure from the veins; because where the veins are found to be hard, that is where the flebotomy should be performed, and when the flebotomist pauses the flebotomy over those, they become contracted due to the flebotomy, and if the vein ruptures, it becomes narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomy man must be stopped and be diligent in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then, after the phlebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, it is not good; otherwise, repeat this another time, leaving that place a little or applying compression over it, if the location is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is abscessed or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two and do not strain the liaison, as it will severely increase the abscess and neither should you immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the vein runs subtily, and you fear that it will not allow the quantity you wish, then repeat the phlebotomy on that spot according to rectitude and adjust the opening a little, and apply compression before that location becomes abscessed, because in many cases, a small opening is sufficient.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Sometimes that already formed deposit may not interest you, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply pressure to some part of the oil fissure, as it alleviates the pain in the joint.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the oil fissure is administered in all phlebotomy where veins must be drained to prevent the spread of venom, and it acts as a tire and wisdom when pressure is applied from one of those over the place, because the venom is subtilized and revolted when it becomes thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of phlebotomy a large deposit is formed, because many times accidents happen, and especially to those who are not stat (bleeding) but rather cauterized, or at the sight of a thin vein, then you apply pressure, and place a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly heated, and tighten it for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary that he does this immediately after the blood clotting of that vein or another vein has been completed.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply to that place a mixture of aloe or myrrh dissolved in oil or mint juice or warm water similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often, accidents occur that require flebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel hardness, your compression should be on that part, for then the swelling is evil and bad; and thereafter beware of applying any cause to it that we have spoken about, for strong blood flows from the clotted artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area where there is stiffness, so that the place is made firm, and take care of that as well as the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And be careful to extract the pus from everyone according to the amount of its virtue and according to the dominant color above the pus as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the pus is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; if it is thick, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, wait until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be mindful of those who are full and strong and require the extraction of pus at once; in such cases, enlarge the incision into the vein and make the venipuncture wider.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, do the opposite; extract it in several stages, and make the incision narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best approach for venipuncture is the transverse section, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where syncope (fainting) occurs after phlebotomy, it is customary to treat that immediately with a small amount of wine or simply diluted oxymel; and extract the blood from the wound in three or four draws.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a chill from the operation, then take something to drink before phlebotomy with an infusion of myrrh or honey-scented mead infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or an infused syrup with a strong fragrance.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and is due to a great deal of blood loss, then take care to drink water mixed with wine and a subtle-scented syrup; and use something aromatic like alkanet, and apply a cold compress to your foot at that area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the fistula again, addressing the part from which fleubotomy is for strong evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the small fistula little by little, according to the amount of virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	He who wishes to extend his arm and repeat the draining of his fistula a second time, and his body is strong, should do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first fleubotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	He who wishes to throw the fistula of his body in the opposite direction from which it declined, should have it drained on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	For a body in which there is much acute and severe inflammation that causes fever, it should be drained once of the pus and a large quantity of it should be removed, and the perception of pain should be intensified before fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of fleubotomy; and you should place your hand over the area of the fistula in the body, so that it does not acquire death instead of fainting, because repeated attempts are necessary when the fleubotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult to extract the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this causes too much pain.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habituate the layperson to perform flebotomy secondarily; or retain this with the sharpness of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifices of the veins; or place over it a light compress of turpeth or of sage, and press until the blood is completely extracted.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is infected, then do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you should draw the blood from that place or from the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the femoral or basilic vein when they are not found or are obstructed, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the vein puncture is that the patient inserts their hand into the wound until the point becomes reddened, and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to that tight attachment with a strict bandage; and puncture the vein according to the transverse small, not longitudinally or according to the width.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be an ample opening, and your vein puncture should be such that you puncture it over the joint of the hand slightly.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the water again and stop the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sanitizing bath in cold water is more static.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is considered safer than all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve tissues.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand strongly or with your other hand, since you have immersed it in cold water, as long as the vein is inflated and clearly visible; then make a transverse incision on it; and if you cut deeply, this will prevent any bleeding.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to cut off your hand during phlebotomy, because it contains the nerves of the digits exposed by cutting through the flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the clot will form in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening; and be careful that you do this in a narrow space.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of the flebotomy of that with the left hand, is it applicable to the ailments of the right side.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same for the flebotomy of him as you have done for the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the treatment of the venous system from the flebotomy is for ailments that are at the edges of the body, as with ailments of the mother, and to stop menstruation, and for ailments of the ribs and ulcers of clothes and old beds, and similar to their ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the flebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his foot in water and friction until the veins appear; then he wraps it around the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein becomes visible after said pressure, and from there it branches out in various directions on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, the wide branch of the vein is left open after the flebotomy, with the leg raised, as it is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a flebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your flebotomy at an angle, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And both the flebotomies should be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is forbidden to urinate, then you should repeat the act of micturition in warm water and let the urine flow into it until it is emptied.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fluotomist misses on the first attempt, then he should repeat the fluotomy in that spot a little, since the area is sensitive; and you need not fear any harm to it, provided that you take care of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for sciatic vein, the area as we have said is below the knee at the passage of the wild branch.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the incision of fluotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is for the purpose of draining the urine.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the flebotomy is that the disease is bathed, and quickly and tightly it extracts the fluid from the deep layers between the skin on all four sides with a long, thin bandage, so that only this is seen.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, you make a flebotomy on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the direction, and this is best; either puncture it with an incision or cut it with a section, because the place of the disease is open.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in most people not easily noticed; and if you find it, and it does not appear to be painful at all, make a flebotomy on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe or the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then carefully loosen the tightness and place your hand over the site of the phlebotomy as strongly as necessary, for it is said to be beneficial.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilators can be of horns, or of metal, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is achieved through two methods: one involves the incision and extraction of pus, and the other involves ventilation through the same incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation, which is through incision, is also in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilators that are administered through incision and extraction of pus are twelve locations in the body, of which one is where ventilation is paused, and it is the last opening in the head; and two openings on each side of the neck; and ventilation from the jaw, below the mouth; and ventilators from two blades; and ventilators from a comb, over the end of the tail; and ventilators from two shells, at two arms' length; and ventilators from two pins; and ventilators from two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of the sanium should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus does not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered with fire or heat in any illness caused by accumulation within, until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to induce venesection for illness or continuously, we should start it at the beginning of the month and end it at its conclusion, in the middle of its course and at any suitable time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men where the sanium (or humor) increases, there is a greater need for venesection; and they find it most severe and acute. From these people, one finds accumulation and redness on their face and head, and swelling on their eyes; and from these, gelling at the site of venesection, and increased risings; and some taste sanium in their mouths or have their tongues coated with it; and their sleep is multiplied, and they sweat sanium while sleeping, have aching, ancient (or deep) plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it occurs for any reason from those (causes), and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the night, then ventilation should be done immediately rather than waiting two or three hours past day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the immediate benefit of ventilation (of the neck) is that when it relieves pressure on the head and what falls into the ears, it is more effective in evacuating all the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is performed at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use (a treatment) that involves friction or in which there is catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, the use of those (treatments) on the feet and on the heads where injuries are confined is not advisable.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May it be done to him who is lying on his back that he experience relief; and for this reason you must instruct the blower to place his hand with a slight pressure on the suction cups, at the places where they have been left, lest there arise a generation of pain.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The use of suction cups (ventozacio) on the lower limbs can replace phlebotomy of the deep vein and basilic vein: and thus it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the lungs, division of the lung's air conduit, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the suction cup on the lower limb be slightly moved, for if it remains in place, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the suction cup application to the head (alhagdahan) confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, inflammation, and tooth root pain; and it is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be sure to order the fan bearer not to press his hand during the incision so as not to pierce an artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the ventilation of the mind is achieved by applying alcohol to the mouth, and it helps with the corruption of the gums and resembles the conditions in the mouth that require phlebotomy, which is done on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventilation that is performed on both scales provides a capstone, which is made by repleting warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two openings within the follicles provides youthfulness to the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, superficial, and cephalic veins; for it draws blood from all those manual veins within the flesh, as well as from the smaller veins of the other, larger veins, so that it attracts to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the bellows-man not to over-process the scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, and leaves it with only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows that is blown over the anus and confers relief to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to purulent ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should instruct the bellows-man to be a powerful bellows, and of iron, for the place needs strong cutting; and it tolerates only strong, subtle bellows and is scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the bellows from the legs should be reduced in size by gradual decrease, for they draw the blood from all over the body, and provide relief to old pains of gout and kidney stones, and of the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and provide relief from pain and swelling; and they are used instead of a flebotomy of two phials, and also in place of the clyster, and of two pins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these weakens the entire body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (or vents) of the loin cloth, the moisture is naturally drawn to the openings on both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the flow of air at the beginning, allowing for a temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the openings - rather, it slightly relaxes them, and tightly holds those that are strained, and allows the humors to come to that place through occurrence alike.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And it should be repeated until the location turns red and swells, and the pain of the gout becomes apparent.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then, you carefully continue with the suction, little by little, and consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has thin skin, take care to scarify him once, but not too deeply, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the fan to enhance the scarification slightly, and apply suction to facilitate the process.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the abscess is enlarged, take care to scarify twice; for in the first incision, the passage for drainage of the abscess and its fluid is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large abscess.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the abscess is very foul-smelling, make your third scarification so that you achieve its final release.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we wish to extract a small abscess bit by bit or a tiny one, a single scarification is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough scarification; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make a deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the stone is very hard, dense, and its pores are narrow, tight, and closed, then the places for the suction cups should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, use oil of narcis, or oil of larkspur, or camomile, or sage.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is very thick and hard, use oil of amber, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or oil of anise, and similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and at these places where leeches are applied, their sucking should be washed with warm water or hot water mixed with salt, or water from a couch, or water from a vineyard, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose sanie (leech's secretion) is of great humidity, washes their suckers with wine or water mixed with mint and sumac and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that one whose excrements (leech's waste) are abundant, wash their suckers with ancient wine or hot water mixed with fennel, marjoram, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before bathing; it is advisable to administer it soon after or within two hours following a bath, and ensure the leech rests appropriately.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before ventilation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has been given bloodletting is irritable and shows signs of severe pain and inflammation, then you must consider causes of coldness, such as with milky fever, indigestion accompanied by vomiting and diarrhea, and similar conditions.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should abstain from their meals as with leeks, and lean meats, and foods seasoned with acid, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking water mixed with alum, or hemp seed extract, and sumac, and between meals use aromatic herbs such as fennel and anise; and it should be recommended to them that they consume little beer and food, abstain from leeks, cabbage, and grapes, and limit their intake of small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is important that on days of ventilation and phlebotomy, liquid intake should be greater than food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is important to give drinks containing almonds, garlic, or musk to certain patients at specific times, such as before ventilation or phlebotomy, in order to provide comfort to the primary members and reduce swelling; however, it is not advisable for them to take that scorching heat.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	All ventilation that involves cutting should be done slowly on the abdomen, and also on the spleen and umbilical area, in places where joints are, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not tolerate cuts upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desirable for those with blood congestion in the members, so they use a slow ventilation over the breast in cases of flux of blood from the nose; and this is used to dissolve the tight ventilation inside the member, just as they pause it over the stomach and umbilical area; because it rarifies the member, it scalds it, and relieves the pain as it resolves ventilation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is held in place over the bruises when accidents occur in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the bruised condition and eradicates the pain from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it appears to be held over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only; and sometimes they are administered over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered filled with hot water in the gallbladder ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation be filled and bring forth pus, it is only hot water or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a wound administered by fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the medicine should be the width of a palm; and in the length of it, at the place where it is in the circuit, half its length, the incision should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Use ery or citrus, with thick margins, lion, donkey, and turtle shells to prevent the member from moving out of its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a transverse cut of ery or iron, where the candle is stopped over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wound is the greater part of that which we have previously treated; and its size is smaller according to the illness and the state of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the bellows of children and the weak are different from the bellows of young men and strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of stopping this bellow is to apply a piece of fire from a wood fire to it appropriately in front of a small amount of wax candle, and place it over the middle of the transverse branch at the exact spot of the bellow, so that the fire is lit around the edge to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Once it is placed over the patient's limb, and the said cloth is over the previously mentioned area, as long as we have the bellows and do not need to use the aforementioned method, heat will be applied to that cloth, and soon after, the bellow will dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And adjust the fire according to your preference, and repeat if needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Place a cup that is administered in pleurisy with water, without transverse or torn membranes, and it should only be filled with water and placed over the affected member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the method: And the size of this cup, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in most members, but only in those where it is impossible to place cups, due to their small size, such as the nose and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups, which are in the infected wounds of pigs.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then, at night and in the morning, it is laid in warm water until they are relieved and no further cause of pain appears in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through phlebotomy and enemas; and then the patient's limbs are rubbed until they turn red; and then they are placed on top of him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and the case is closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the area with an enema, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the area with warm water, then apply pressure with cold water; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the swelling of the sore persists and it is prolonged, then this indicates the presence of blood vessels, and you should immerse a cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the swelling subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wound is enlarged, sprinkle on it vitriol trichate, or gall and substances similar to those from astringent causes, until the abscess is drained; or apply heat over the area with cooked fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the wound, and the abscess drains.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if it becomes necessary, apply blood-letting, when it is possible to remove these.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If blood-letting is prohibited from suspension, then the place should be rubbed with a fresh wound or left with a needle in the place until it heats up; and they should be paused, because those that feel any pain soon will give way to the wound.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them a little aloe trichate, or salt, or ashes, and soon they will come off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section on the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, my child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this way of thinking among scientists in our land is hidden; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have only devoted myself to it after a long study of the books of the Ancients and an understanding of their teachings, so that I may extract science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And now I will describe my experiments and studies over the course of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And now, I present the guessed translation of the provided line:
Capitol primier.	First principle.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	In summary, and as a collection of fractures of the bones, those whose mention is necessary before beginning the remembrance of fractured limbs and different cases of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which the artificer is forced at the beginning, and at rest concerning the truth of those; it is you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or misalignment, you must then consider at the beginning whether to begin with fleubotomy or to separate it, or in most cases, if no other cause prohibits, with a certain strength of virtue, or as it presents itself, or weak in decrepitude, or there is time for vehement heat, or vehement friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then I am satisfied with my diet of herbs, veal, and crabs; I forbid fatty meats and filling myself with foods, and all foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as there is no danger of gangrene, or if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their previous condition, in which they usually recover from it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the bone is broken and begins to heal, it is necessary to cut off food that is nutritious but heavy and rich in fat, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and caps (perhaps referring to a type of grain or vegetable), and beef, and veal, and fresh fish, and large animals, and sheep, and lighter foods similar to these. And at this stage, the goal is to achieve coagulization of the fracture more gently and slowly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that the bones in old people and the infirm are easily broken and cannot be healed or consolidated according to their nature due to the lack of blood flow in their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for as long as those members remain dried out, and they continue and consolidate those that are of their own nature at the end of the fever, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature may adjust and heal over a broken bone from any cause similar to gout in which swelling occurs that adheres and tightens that part which is always glued together and compressed together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, or any cause that does not prevent it from performing its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to refrain from the patient's food, food in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness predominate, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The diversity of fractures varies according to the diversity of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of a bone in the leg is different from the fracture of a bone in the head, and the fracture of a bone in the foot differs from the fracture of a bone in the arm; similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And now, let's proceed with the line-by-line translation:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great variety of fractures lie within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diverse species of bone fractures in their innards; for some are curved fractures or what happens to them in the stars; and sometimes they are fractures according to the length of the bone: such as stage fractures and star fractures, and others proceeding and not proceeding, as is done in writing when preparing a script, and fracture by plague and disruption on the head, and small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every species has its own method or torment for restoration according to the recollection of its distinct places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is how bone fracture is known: the curvature of it, and that prominence and appraisal from touch, and only when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore if there is no sign of deformation or obvious injury when touching the bone and the pain is not severe, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may be either a deformation or a small fracture, in which case you must apply your hand with pressure and compression throughout; once you have done this, place medicines as indicated at the appropriate time, and make it very tight due to the subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that if the location is curved and does not split into two or anything else without accident in it stagnantly, when the entire part of its compar (presumably a body part) is moved, then you must begin your correction from your hour (time or effort) to rectify the curvature that has occurred, with caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If it is an apothema (a medical term that could refer to a variety of conditions) caut, then leave it for a few days until the apothema ceases; and subsequently bind it with whatever means you can find suitable for elevation and support.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you should know that the restoration and stitching of an intestine is more delicate than the bone in which it occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second one as the recollection of it comes.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bone is deeply damaged, it is necessary to extend this severed member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position should be such that you place the member in its natural state while the extensions of the severed member are spread out, then pierce so as to cause them to return towards their proper places, using any means or method possible.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care so that you do not harm the patient with your operation, or cause any damage; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And at that opportune moment, apply your hand to it, and if you notice any different cause, correct it and engulf it with the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent stretching and compression; thus do foolish doctors often cause gangrene by their operations, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen with their violent practices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Then attach, provide proper adjustment and decent operation and stricture of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him/her squint so that it does not hurt in the hour of his/her vigils and sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and you must take charge of its management, and all its movements at full virtue; and await that the position of the member be a position that ensures no pain, which is the cause when sent in the disposition of the position of the member with pain or injury; then know that you change its position to one in which it does not feel pain; and guard so that the position of it be straightened and aligned, so that no tortuosity happens to the member when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should observe, because you must know that the members are diverse in their size and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And regarding those that are small like the arm and the wrist and similar to others, you must understand that the envelopment should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are thicker like the skin or the leg, understand that these should have a thick and firm envelopment, because the adjacent tightness connects the large member and makes it firm from all sides, so nothing enters inside.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, begin to expel the evacuation of the bowels, apply appropriate pressure to it, over the site of that fracture with three or four layers depending on the member; and tighten your hand slightly onto the ligature.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then inspect the part above the fracture site to ensure that you do not further tighten the constriction that you have already created at the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gradually extend the wrapping around the fracture site, slowly relaxing the constriction until you can take away the wrap from the site, opening it up considerably.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fractured area, over the previous wrapping; and inspect the openings left by the fracture, both in the stricture of the new wrapping and in the mollification (loosening) of the first wrapping as we have mentioned above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the wrapping strips a piece of leather or cloth to which is attached the contortion of the fracture, if there is any; otherwise, do not place anything in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your hand over the other area, and wrap these sterile bandages decently around it as soon as there is no inflammation or abscess in the place, and pause on what caused the abscess and what has brought about the inflammation; leave it for a few days, and then tighten the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the bandages should be of different types, wisely chosen; they can be made of canvas, wooden sticks, or palm leaves, and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, pay attention that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the member in size and smallness; then tighten the bandages over the other area as per your initial structuring; and wrap it tightly towards them decently as we have said about structuring, and it should be according to your structuring regarding the location of the fracture, and the wider it is from the fracture, the looser the structuring.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are of varying thickness and many; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in some surgical operations where the thread of the cords is twisted, it is a great error when the constriction is not uniform.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Furthermore, very thin threads are not suitable, as you cannot achieve the desired constriction, and it does not ensure that there is enough space between one thread and another to accommodate a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient's condition is aggravated by the extremities of the bones, then apply constriction at these sites, using materials like leather or woolen thread, as long as it does not cause any harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is as bad as an illness, causing disruption in the chain of treatment, and it comes to mind again, as mentioned in the second chapter, according to its particularities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely broken member is not tightly bandaged on the first day; this is because, when the member is large, it cannot be held by bandages alone, but must be wrapped properly after several days, or fifth, or seventh, depending on your confidence in the healing without apothema.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasterers that the ancients used, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as a quick restoration for fractures, especially useful for complex cases and particularly for women and children, because it does not allow heat or friction: take flour dust, the very heart of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if it is not possible to do so, then take a fine cloth, and prepare the composition not too thick or thin; and use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: prepare assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which are crushed from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe, each in equal parts; all these ingredients should be mixed with alichil water or egg albumen if the patient's wound is clean; then apply this plaster, as it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and will benefit many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plastering method for fractures and twists: prepare myrrh and gum Arabic from dragon's blood, each in equal parts; add myrra and aloe, each in dragon's blood five times; acacia, six times; and Armenian silk, eight times.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these ingredients should be ground in a mortar to a fine consistency, mixed with water or egg albumen and administered accordingly.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for applying plasters to joints and bones separated from their places, causing pain in these and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool, submerge it in a mixture of wine and oil, and apply it to the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not only without restorative power but also prevents abscesses and effectively relieves pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores closed bones: take dried fig leaves and poppy leaves, mix them together, and make a plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method for a quick-acting plaster used for bone fractures and to resolve abscesses: take cuttings from alder, chamomile, and violet flowers, also flour of earth (likely clay), mix them all together; make it into a paste and apply it to the affected area, unless the member is infected.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that water of cold cucumber or water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a poultice for stronger resolution than the first one mentioned is as follows: take alder bark and seeds of fennel, and lupine, and melilot, and marjoram, and violet flowers, and chamomile, from any source; all these should be crushed and mixed with lavender water or rosewater or vinegar, according to the quality of the member and the rest of the patient's condition.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not state in his treatise that the affected member should be rested before its restoration, but rather recommends applying a mixture of wax and oil, nor anything else; he also advises using a medium consistency between too thick and too thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A hot compress can also be applied to the fractured member after its restoration and when there is lack of warmth due to cold, just as with myrrh, fennel seeds, and similar substances, in accordance with the causes previously mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of lint, dried leaves from a man's beard or quail feathers, and salt, crush them together, mix and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the injury and if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, it is not necessary to dislodge it immediately; then, you should not attempt to remove it hasty.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain, pressure, or inflammation at the site, immediately remove or dislodge whatever is causing it and stop applying the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and marine sponge, soak them in warm water, and apply this to the area until the pressure and pain subside; then let the member rest for an hour. Afterwards, place over it some clean wool soaked in vinegar or rose oil, wrap it up, and leave it for a night, ensuring there is no further infection and that the inflammation of the member has subsided and the pain has lessened.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that narrow constriction, applying a small plaster and do not tighten it with your first restriction, but treat it gently until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have subsided, and you find a need for further treatment, then repeat that process as you initially began.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no such cause occurs in the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove it, but leave it for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, as you may see from the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and draws close to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and adjust in the thickness of the patient's food, according to the remembrance of that.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture, already dried and weakened, but it does not heal, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; so immerse that part in hot water every time you take care of it; and do this for all three days; slightly relieve the tightness, and by this operation, direct the nutrition to the member, and thus cure it gradually.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But here is what foolish restorers of a member's fracture do when it does not heal according to plan, as it should, and instead worsens in its course, which is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if it were possible, they would enlarge the ancient wounds in the freed parts and turn them away from this.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that completely shatters the bone within its joint, leaving the bone thus shattered in the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the rear of it; and this type of fracture is called *levatio absoluta*.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the extent of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and they can be caused by compression or traction; and their cause is a blow with force or an unexpected impact on the bone.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, causing the pannus (fatty tissue) to be close to the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two types of fractures can vary greatly.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And in fractures where the bone is shattered into small pieces within its joint, so minute as to affect only a few hairs, this type of fracture is called *capillary*.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone, and appears as if some layer of bone enters the cracks inside, and it occurs in the concavity of the place just as it happens with the bones of the leg when they are struck and their entry into the cracks inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is most commonly found in the bones of the humid body, just as it is in the skulls of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures, when the bones are separated like stars, are painful just as when stones are detached.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then come to the remembrance of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I would recognize all these types of fractures by detecting them, and by questioning their attempts, and the outward appearance of the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special capillary is known for being discovered over the bone, it is cleaned, and bandaged over it as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of illness, and if you observe signs that indicate by their manifestation on evil, such as vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, bleeding from the nose and redness of those parts, and similar symptoms in the vital organs, it is not considered healthy.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you observe non-corrupt accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is because if the plague comes to you at the beginning as it comes and this happens in the winter, then you should study the condition of the bone regarding its position on the twelfth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, you must be careful to cut off the flesh surrounding the bone on the fifth day, as what remains will be corrupt with panicula, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pannicula covering the brain and is in small pieces and inflammation, you must carefully incise the comminuted and inflamed part, as I have mentioned before.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	For it is that you cut open the patient's wound, discover the bone according to its usual position and manner, as possible based on the form of the plague, and then close over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter a bone fracture with pus or abscess, be cautious and treat it as follows: fill the area with soaked bandages in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the abscess is calmed and be sure of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumferential incision around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the other method is that you insert the knife into the bone at an angle, and this is its form: Then administer another incision to this one, slightly wider than that one; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	Then administer the wider incision than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	You should choose the right number of incisions, some wider than others; and some shorter, with their tips more acute, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the incision to prevent any conflict between its head and the wound.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, you must pierce through its circumference before administering scissors to the incisions, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus, but because they do not reach the end of the bone in the testis, so that when it is brought close, its rounded extreme or margin is over what remains of its head, sharp like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, as each one suits the specificity of every bone, provided that in all parts of the skull, the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of specificity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method of three kinds of incisions: The quality of perforating through the circumference of a broken bone is to place the incision over the bone and twist it in your hands, as long as you know that the bone is already penetrated; then change the incision to another location, and stop when you have completely gone around the thickness or width of the ray or region.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then cut with scissors what is between any two bones, and make that thin pus flow over it in a lifting manner, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause through some tools you prepare for this purpose, as well with pincers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch any cause of damage to the patient.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So, once you have perforated the bone and it is separated from the tissue if it was connected to it, and you have extracted it, be careful that you scrape and clean it on the roughness of it from what is in the bone differently from the scissors, but nonetheless ensure it is both thorough and subtle compared to other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you encounter any fragment of small and thin bones, then use the facility at your disposal from among your tools; and then apply this to cure the wound with liniment and ointment as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which cuts Gaul and praise for great merit; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have uncovered that space and have paused, leaving behind the extremity of this slow and gentle cut, of which this is the shape.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular partition is round and does not cut any cause, and the acute partition is in two parts ahead in length, so when you have it; the lenticular partition should be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute-incising one on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the cut of one partition with a small mallet until it cuts through the bone completely, thus revolving, and you should be sure of the pannicul that it does not occur in it by accident that you fear in any way, and if the physician14 was the most foolish among all men and the most ignorant of their; certainly, he would have been sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a rupture occurs in any part of the pancreas due to some cause related to bone, he should incise it with a scalpel at its edge, and then deliver the pancreas from it easily, as it is freed from its pain and suffering.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the pancreas, and what has been severed from the bone is the face of it, containing asperities and subtle lines, then you must scrape off those asperities and eradicate those subtile lines with the razors you have prepared in various numbers, to be able to administer them in every location as most convenient for their use and most correct according to how your operation has left the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer in your reasoning with which to scrape the bone at the beginning, using the subtlest of those razors, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you have administered the most powerful and subtlest of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Place a small glass tube in each of the other minor fractures, and break it gently; ensure you administer treatment according to what you find during correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is the cause that it is not preserved for all those who have studied this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us dwell on what he has written; we have demonstrated this in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicul is contracted when you radiate the bone, then take cloth from it according to the quantity of the abscess, submerge that in warmed oil, and place it over the abscess; then take another cloth, folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and warmed oil, and place that over the first cloth, lightly pressing it upon the abscess without causing pain; and finally, administer a lat (unclear term) remedy to that, and do not tighten it unless the abscess is as large as it can be.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the absence of gangrene; then remove it and administer medicines that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of earth, powder of herbs and aristology, and others similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this powder that is to be sprinkled over the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to them all medicines of the proper kind of which they abstain and do not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not leave any pus or other impurities; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is attached to the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts and attacks it, and causes great harm to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull of the head, as from it the bone is softened and most when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether accidents to the patient occur, as we have said, knowing that they are harmful to all their skill.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness does not disappear with the medication applied to it, but because of that same medication, then you should take some honey and olive oil mixed together in equal parts, and apply those linments to the affected area; and then use a cloth to cover it; and subsequently apply the appropriate treatments for healing as needed.
Capitol .iii.	**Chapter III**
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather one of those small bones, so it has two parts, and since the broken piece is cartilaginous, it is not actually broken, but suffers from attrition, deformity, and inflammation.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you should insert that small piece into its place within the nose and hold it there with the help of a specific instrument, until the bone returns to its original shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this to facilitate it for yourself, and be careful not to cause harm in your operation on the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not heal there, then you should equalize the pressure at the end of the line where there is a slight bulge.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make it similar to this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And be careful to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, hold the eighth or ninth day of rest for the healing of the wound cautiously.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of clean cloth in the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and make sure it is as wide as to fill the nasal cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus, some of the ancient restoratives are that the swelling be immersed in a bath, and changed throughout the day, as I have not seen; it is now known that the joint should be soaked in an alum bath mixed with flour powder; and then the swelling should be kept within until the bone is hardened and the cartilage strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, it is encountered inside the nose instead of swelling, due to the high amount of pus, as it is wrapped in lion's linen; and it is that the fracture of the nose is already severe, and the evil does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this course is not necessarily required; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use swelling.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another case of post-operative infection occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or a bandage dipped in hot vinegar and rosin, or dust it with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not accidentally cause an abscess, then cover that external wound with flour of sizamin and powder of crushed herbs mixed with egg albumen, and place your hand over it, pressing the lion's stop, and do not let air enter for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If your nasal bones are broken or fractured, then you must carefully cut them and extract the fragments using suitable instruments; then with the cut, clean it using what is appropriate to that place, and consolidate it, and apply suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must carefully clean it with heat and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	**Chapter IV.**
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	**Restoring the Mandible After a Fracture**
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and not split into two and bent inward, then its healing will be slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert your right little finger, pushing gently from the inside to facilitate the healing on the inside, and equally from the outside of the bone's fragment.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then apply extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, so that they can be brought back into proper position.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a commotion of teeth due to disruption, then use those of which you expect to remain in a row with gold or silver or ivory wire; and place your hand over the broken mandible first, then place a doubled cloth on it, and a large, properly cut piece of cloth, or a single piece equal in length to the mandible; and then secure it as appropriate according to your equipment for binding it, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and refrain from consuming spicy foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should cut and loosen what has become tight, and correct what has been altered by applying a poultice of flour, egg white, or chickpea meal, since you will have removed the cerate from it, and place over the paste a lion's hair.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And having thus placed and adjusted this poultice over him, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless it becomes loose before the fracture heals; for generally this fracture will be tight in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer what we have mentioned before in the treatment of it until it heals, and drain that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of bone or dislocation, then you should carefully align those dislocations with what seems appropriate in the removal of those from the tools.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the fracture is narrow, you should expand it with a flebotomy according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have aligned those dislocations, and if they do not naturally return to their place, expand the opening of the fracture; otherwise, apply a splint to that one of the appropriate tools and reduce it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. The term "Capitol" could refer to various concepts depending on the surrounding text, such as a geographical location, a building, or even a concept in medicine or law. Without additional context, a precise translation is not feasible.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Regarding the restoration of the furcula (a term that could refer to various structures based on context, but often used anatomically) when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the bones of the joint are broken, the fork-shaped part is fractured, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not involve additional injuries; it is easier to restore it; or it occurs in such a way as to cause complications, and it is difficult to restore it; or the fracture is like a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is like a plague, you should have two assistants; one holds the adjutor and continues to hold the broken fork, while the other stretches the patient's leg at that point.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then bind the fracture with ties as needed so that it takes the shape required; not in a slight prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, wait until the patient rests with the edge of the wound covered with a cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your necessity; then stretch and raise the fork and shorten the thread with your hand as you swallow the fracture as it suits.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot stretch the end of the fork to the desired extent, because it has reached its limit, then wait until the patient's pain is relieved, and place a cushion over the muscles in a size half as large.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscles on both sides until the bone of the fork is raised above the wound, then correct the fracture and bind it with your cloth.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel resistance from the fork and it is stubborn, then cut through it and extract those threads with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, you will ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for this purpose, since you had left the fork, the instrument that serves to grasp; and it is an instrument of wood or iron, which has this form.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a cup, from which this is the concavity; and its size according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; for there should be two ends thus, with one end wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague which you have made when you extracted the tissue from the bone is wide, and there is no danger of infection, then you will adjust both edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is minor or you fear infection, use clean rags and poultices according to the amount of wound tissue.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If infection occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in hot vinegar and olive oil, and place it over the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the bone fracture is severe and deep, make a plaster using flour from the mill mixed with egg albumen, apply it over the wound, cover it with a lion's stop (bandage), and then place a thin thread over it to keep it in place. If needed, use a longer thread as the Saracens do, about one palm length or so; also, sprinkle powdered herbs twice over the bandage and plaster. Take a thin table knife, about three digits long, and cut it to a similar width as the fracture; wrap the bandage around it and place it over the fracture site. Also, apply humectant in the same way, turn it over, and reapply the bandage, ensuring that the patient's skin is not irritated by the thread or plaster, and reduce the swelling. When the bone fracture has healed sufficiently, this method will not be needed.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And as long as the bone's fracture is not exacerbated; and so that you may observe the malady each day, if you see the ligament soften or the sternum already reformed, then correct it and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then suspend the patient's sleep on their side, and place a small cushion under their thigh to prevent the pressure from sleeping on it at night; so that with that, the patient's helper is raised from the side of that area, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated due to the muscle, or the patient's arm is lying on the collarbone.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless you notice improvement in the area or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the bandage if you see any signs of deterioration to it, adjust the tightness, and restore it; leave it until the fracture of the furcula is healed and the wound is coalesced.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and eased according to the most in 28 days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of the patient, but it is not completely broken off, only the edges are damaged.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the lateral part is broken and it is broken in the middle part, and it is not known but by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with the help of such devices as are at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a powder made from almonds and stop it with; and apply a dust of doubled cloth; and place a thin wooden plank on the side of the table according to the whole or a little more of the spatula.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the ribcage is concave in any part of the chest, then you should compress that concave area with your hand, and return the ribcage to its natural position.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly with a bandage, compressing the tongue of the ribcage until it returns to its proper place without any damage.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the condition of the ligament each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and return the ribcage to its place if it has shifted.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And watch over the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the ribcage will be restored in ten days or twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore, when this period is complete, you will loosen the ligament, and you should be certain that it is from among the bones whose beginning does not cause fear or the dissolution of their union.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the site of the painful bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it, and act as we have said in the fracture of the furca of the scapula of apoplexy if this should happen here.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII.**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Foot.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, and this should be treated immediately; otherwise, its ends may become infected and shattered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And one of the accidents of the foot when the middle is broken is that it tilts to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in moving, and all symptoms including severe leukocyte count and vomiting; and it is manifest within the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is to lay the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their thighs; then press their muscles and adjust their ribs with the help of two assistants, and be delicate in the operation and disposition according to every possible manner that suits this case, so that the shape of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of sauze or calig (a type of cloth) and similar materials in layers, wrapping it around; be delicate in binding the broken bone without causing further damage; periodically check the binding and tighten it as the swelling goes down; consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of the fragment, or if there is corrosion, pain, or an abscess at the site, then cut and remove the plaster, and clean the wound, rectifying what has occurred by means of treatment; reduce the new plaster if needed; and adjust the binding so that healing takes place.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly, but in severe blows to the back; and as for their extremities, away from the point of impact, it does not cause compression to those parts because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not veiled from sense, you must inquire about its condition by examining it.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And its restoration should be such that it aligns with the fracture as mentioned above according to the method possible; if it is swallowed, then it should be extracted according to its covering, and a plaster applied to strengthen the broken bone, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, it causes severe pain and piercing to the patient, just as piercing occurs to one who has pleured, and due to this, the rib puts pressure on the lung; it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of bitter liquid; and this is a condition of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And ancient remedies are ingeniously devised in that most cunning art.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And regarding these, they say: cover that which prevents the intake of food causing inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is forced out of place.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would caution against this so that it does not cause a trivial infection to develop into a serious ulcer, if it happens; and if it already has, then help should be sought immediately.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also said that some should be applied to the affected area to promote healing and strength, but it is recommended that suction be done carefully; this seems logical, yet there is concern that the wind could push excess fluid to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also said: cover the area with cloth previously soaked in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, compressing it according to its shape; this is also treated as a cure for pleurisy of food and with medications.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the disease causes severe constriction that cannot be tolerated, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the disease, then cut away at the site, expose the broken edge, and place an instrument above it to preserve the shape, the memory of which is preceded, and cut through the bone easily, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And it is appropriate to adjust the two edges of the wound if it is large, with stitching, and dress it with bandages until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and insert poultices in warm oil and place them over the area, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to change the position on which he sleeps until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes, the bones of the neck can fracture and their cartilage can be affected, resembling the fractures of the spine in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider that if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and paralyzed, and they cannot move or tighten them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or a needle, they do not feel pain, then you know that recovery is unlikely, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in the areas of constriction and piercing, then know that the fracture of the bone is not severe and that the malady will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine in the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you notice that the pain has already subsided, pay attention to the part affected, and when lying on their back, they experience difficulty breathing and movement, sometimes they rise onto their hands and cannot urinate, then know that it is a serious condition, and do not attempt its treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no specific cause occurs from those symptoms, the underlying cause is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is that you pierce at the sensation of the abscess with a hot cauterize iron, or use lard or other substances; place this on the affected area several times a day until the abscess becomes numb by the cautery.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it over the affected area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain is felt until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to remove the atrophy of a bone or any cause that has already separated from it, you must clean any discharge on the wound and expose the bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing them if they are large; and tend to the healing of any incarnated pus from infections, as long as it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the end of the bone is broken and it is the last joint, then you must insert your left hand's thumb into the space between the bones and, as best as possible, align the broken bone with the other hand using the second position; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in it, then bind them and hold them still, and treat the wound with the cure that precedes its healing.
Capitol .x.	**Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the bowel.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the bowels are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but communication in the extremities of those parts and they are sharp at their length and decline to the inside; and it causes pain for the patient in that place and puncturing, and the leg is stunned when a fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the form of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extreme of it, then you should bind that according to what you have learned by reason, making it similar to its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the length or has already declined to the inside parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have secured that, place the plaster over it and then place a wooden or leather board on top, and tighten tightly so as not to fear any fracture or removal of the star (or bone).
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And open the concavity until it accommodates that which fills it, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If there is a risk of gangrene, stop the extension of the ulcer and its restoration until the gangrene has subsided, and apply to it what was mentioned before; then return to the restoration of the intestine, and tighten it as covered.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it affects the joints or bones is broken, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the broken assistant (or: support).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a plane of moderate thickness as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And both ends of the ligament should be seen to be in two places, and then it is suspended from a higher place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Then follow the patient on their side; and then throw your broken arm over the leg until it reaches the thickness of the limb in the middle where the curvature of the leg is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the physician will extend it to the parts below; and then the doctor should place his hands on the fracture, until the fracture returns as it ought to be.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient be turned over onto their back and raise their chest with one hand while the other holds the area above the fracture with their fingers; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other to hold the pus from below. And each of them extends themselves according to their ability.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, tighten your grip on the fracture with the ligament and another ligament, and each of the two assistants extends themselves in two directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and the other side below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, you should stop the ligament at that place and over the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Immerse this in easy water and perform the treatment, and then when it is immersed according to its nature and applied with good application, tighten it if it does not cause infection through cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If infection through cauterization occurs, then leave the tightness within the seventh day, place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rosin on it while the abscess is healing, and then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm onto the aid, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And unroll the cloth and tighten it around the arm aid to keep the arm in place without any hindrance from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that it rests on the fracture that is both thick and strong compared to the other bones; and it places between each bone the width of the finger, and the length of the bones according to the break with an addition of three parts from the whole.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten the bones with the bandage or splint that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the bandage or splint over the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the less the fracture is displaced, the looser the bandage or splint can be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, depending on the position of the bones and the bandage as we have said in the moment when you restore the member to its normal position, this is how you proceed.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear gangrene, then leave the stricture and the stitches within until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the dressing on all parts for three days so as to prevent any occurrence of pressure or swelling at the site; and also ensure that food does not reach the member due to excess tightness of the dressing; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that nothing of this sort will happen, then do not loosen the ligature but rather wait three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's rest in the supine position with their back and hands on the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm, fully packed compress of wool on the injured member, and consider at all times during the night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing become soft; therefore correct it entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that the food is subtle at first until it begins to tighten; and now you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the custom of the assistant and the leg support, they should be tightened for 10 days, and you will notice that they become loose and should be given baths and applied with ointments that correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is old and healed, you will not loosen that ligament and stitches within one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of arm fractures.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, which is known as the elbow bone, and the other is larger, which is supported below the small bone, extending upward.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the main or secondary bowstring is broken, it is usually broken in two pieces at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bowstring breaks above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bowstring below breaks, and its fracture is severe, then healing becomes difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse is when two bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that breaks is the smaller bowstring above, it is good for the doctor, as its restoration requires less effort and time before it heals completely.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bowstring breaks, then more extension is required, which is more difficult.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two incisions are made at the same time, then be sure to apply pressure on the most painful extraction point.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And be sure to place your hand in such a way that you restore the intestine and extend it over one of the cushions, with the wrist of your hand away from them, more so than all the others, and the painful area lower than the rest, with the patient resting on a prepared bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at the appropriate height or angle, so that the patient does not struggle.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then have the assistant extend their free arm below the patient or along their side, and another minister similarly above them.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bones within to reduce them, according to the best possible configuration.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstacles, then you must perforate and reduce all the weight to its place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separated fragment that will not respond to treatment and restoration is not hoped for, then you must cut it off and stop it according to the method we have discussed above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is severe and you have already dealt with this particular case in a previous chapter, then take up the care of that one as well.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line it with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, using greater care between specific and subtle points, and stretch the cloth tightly over that area until the abscess subsides; then remove the cloth and apply a plaster prepared from powder of cornmeal mixed with honey, and place bands; and let the bandage that is placed on that fracture be both further and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are arranged in major positions, either in a single fracture or in two fractures together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture more strongly and vehemently, and as the tightness in the parts above the fracture or in the lower parts of it increases, reduce the pressure a little more gently according to how the recall of the pain occurs at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the bands that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread by which they are tightened should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires correction, as soon as you notice the pain in the member, it is advisable to apply water or some other remedy until the pain disappears.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And allow the member to relax until it rests, then carefully return the constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightness has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears like that, then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then you must soften that slightly and allow it to rest for a few days until the nourishment reaches it, then strengthen it accordingly.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hold the patient's hand with your virtue to prevent restless movements, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even earlier in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the state of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers**
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal well unless the cause of the injury is addressed.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when an injury or fracture occurs in the hand, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and lays the hand on the affected area with equal pressure, and then place your own hand over it.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them so that they are correctly positioned together.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover it with a compress and stoppers, otherwise you risk an infection; then place the stepl (or bandage) over it according to the area's size, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the inner parts of the hand, and it seems like a thumb's nail is broken, make the patient hold that part tightly; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bandage of cloth on which the body is placed should be applied to the palm, and it should be tightened as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer parts, you should place a bandage on it and another bandage to the side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; then apply tightness, thus as the hand returns to its normal position between the joints.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the finger, and it is the proximal phalanx, it should be immobilized according to its shape and close it firmly with the palm, and if you wish, hold the small right splint to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers, just as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the little finger, or in the ring finger, it should be immobilized on the finger to which it belongs; or all of them can be immobilized together, which is better; or a small splint can be placed on top of it, just as we have said for the proximal phalanx.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and return that, the order of the abscess, carefully and opposite - with respect to your operation - to what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described in the narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, presenting itself in pain according to its position regarding the fracture and the amount of pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in this way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament left over the fracture, and the patient is placed on their belly and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the surgeon extends the ligament to its position according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is indicated for the thigh, then its ligament is drawn towards the opposite side at the joint of the hip, allowing for extension and preventing bending, while another ligament is left over the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if it seems that the fracture is deep, then make the ligament proper to the joint, and extend it to the adjacent parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as much as possible according to their natural appearance, and when the bone is properly joined, cover it with a bandage and tightness; otherwise, you risk causing damage to the affected member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If damage occurs in the affected member, then leave it for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be made tight: it should cover the fracture with a hard cloth, folded twice or three times, and removed when excess is present; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the wound.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of linen between the thigh and the leg near the joint, bringing the ends of the strip from the sides, making them dominant over both parts, and then turn it back over the leg and thigh, removing what is superfluous from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and apply a cold compress to the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the vacuum between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the constriction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then commence with a strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four folds, and as you stretch away from the fracture site, your compression becomes weaker and lighter and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the strip to the sides until it reaches the toe joint, and strongly hold both ends of the cloth from the other side to prevent the ligament from shifting from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then gently tighten the bandage over it so that it does not cause damage to the affected member or lead to gangrene or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any cause from those arises, then pay attention to its detachment from you, and correct what has happened immediately, as we have mentioned before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the bone itself, then cover it as best you can; otherwise, wrap it and apply remedies to it, and pay attention to the recall of what preceded the pain until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be adjusted with bands, as we have mentioned in the aid and support for the leg.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring it in this manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, then another bandage should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that he does not limp from the one that has been treated.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a little less or a little more, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	**Chapter XV**
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Humerus**
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the fracture of the humerus in the arm often leads to prolonged pain, and as a result, it may cause increased tightness and stiffness.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it happens that the fracture is not just a crack or break in its parts, but rather a severe fracture, this is considered a great affliction, and it has been a source of suffering for many.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it should be done in such a way that it replaces what was broken, reconnecting and joining the parts together as best as possible according to reason and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and press it onto that round spot, if you need to; tighten around it with something suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the arrangements we have recommended in other fractures, thus taking care and opposing to any incident that might harm it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the femur; and the other is thin and is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the arm itself; the operation on them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the broken bone is a subtle fracture, the leg is shattered in multiple places.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the broken bone is a severe, complete fracture, you will feel a pop, and it is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply extensions, tension, and ligation of the bands according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the leg fracture is open without severe damage, the extension should be less and lighter, and it will benefit from your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is any cause for surgery on the arm, and it is when you bind the stars and complete all the surgical tie, you will take pieces of wood from a thick tree where they are left with causes that are rooted alone, and they are made entirely of palm branches; align them to those that require slight roughness, and do not be stiff with your hands, and let the length of those correspond to the length of the leg, and from the inside to the outside at the deepest point.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, place one at the crotch of the leg from one side and another from the other side, and they should cover all parts of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then attach the two stirrups in three places on each side and at the middle point, for this structure prevents the leg from bending at the joints, and it stays firmly in place.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a strap of leather is administered according to the length of the leg, and it holds the leg in place so that it does not move.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, make sure you do this in cases of fracture, and when that pain is particularly acute.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each leg daily, studying it thoroughly to understand its condition, and observe for signs of hernias or inflammations or other similar causes; and when any of those conditions arise, take care to treat them until they are healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their dislocation.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not suffer fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely suffer fractures, but they do sustain wear and tear due to their mobility.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and these bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient should lay their foot on the ground prepared in this way as they recover.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is elevated among these bones, and apply pressure to them, pressing and binding them until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that on the foot with its natural flexibility, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes from which you need relief.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as the condition passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on these is as well known to you.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if someone says it is broken, then restore them, and engage them as well as you have learned in the restoration of the said bones with your hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place this broken bone in line with its length and slightly bend it on one side; and put the foot on this table which is properly positioned, and tighten that with its natural flexibility.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken off from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place over each part a cloth soaked in warm water, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one end of the table to make an opening in the foot's belly so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and be attentive to any accident related to this.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	**On Fractures of the Hip Bone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bone**
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone is fractured, make it rest in a position that allows the broken part to be raised slightly, and place something behind it to support it.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the cavity with heat, applying it to the wound thus with hope; and the woman is made to bend, slowly raising her legs one by one, until everything is removed from within so that the wound is exposed before the removal of the cavity with hope and the broken bone heals.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then she places poultices on the patient's back, and when they wish to urinate, they relax the wound with ease and urinate, then return it and place it according to the same method as before, and finally, return to their original poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And she does so for seven days or around that time, for it is thus restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and place a tube of canvas over the wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, for the fracture heals.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with a compress and remains for some days, according to our prescription, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and healing the water that we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be overlooked in these proximal fractures, which rarely occur, especially to those who have little knowledge or experience with this my book; for that fracture speaks to you in the greatest dispositions for a direct and strict healing.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a man's broken leg, take a poultice from above and place it on the leg; then wrap it with cloth, and wrap it again, and lay it for three days or so, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Capital XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are injured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an injury, especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or its counterpart, or similar to that which requires incision and drainage as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the injury causes pus, then you should incise it, holding back the discharge as you cover it with a clean cloth or bandage three times, unless there is another reason not to do so.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And soon after, begin to restore the fracture in that member, and do not prolong it, unless there is a risk of gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs cauterize it carefully, then leave the healing of it within the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the eighth of every month, lest you cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If a bone is broken and protruding from the skin, cover it to prevent further damage and use your hands or tools to gently reduce the fracture and align it with minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is beyond your control and the alignment of the bone requires a specific tool, then use your hands or a suitable instrument; an ideal instrument for this purpose is one made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and its width should be determined by the amount of damage; for this reason, a doctor must have several of these tools of varying lengths and widths for different types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And once reduced, it should be secured with minimal pressure to prevent further displacement during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of sharp extreme on which the margin of its extremes; and the upper part of it should tend to thickness, and from the middle part of it within the divisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "voluntary lip opening" in Greek, hence the term "paleta pauca".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the purpose that the acute end of it is stopped above the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it draws back all at once as the bone returns, and is wrapped around with some tension.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore it tries to intertwine the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin and does not take the instrument for good leverage, then you must insert the end of that bone within the instrument's reach.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut off that part which we have mentioned for him with scissors or saw it in any way possible to your skill.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cut off that which is rough on the bone with small chips.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned, and the hernia is reduced, if the patient feels intense pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; then do what you have found beneficial for the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration to the bone is complete, then immerse a piece of black sticky fabric in vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not place any seal or other material over the wound, so that it does not suffer putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then apply straw in the right manner for the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can cut through it with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be extremely careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, and they cause their patients great pain or even death from corruption or severe injury, which is unwise.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the contraction of the wound is slight, flexible, different from the contraction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are concerned about further complications such as those we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, do not apply pressure to it, but rather use a hard cloth wrap instead of straw and tighten it around those parts.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when, after one or two days, the pain begins to manifest, having been engendered in the joint, you should remove from its position the cloth that you had placed over it, and then administer certain remedies, those which by our custom are used to treat such plagues, just as we use tetracycline and similar substances.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is fitting for you to clean the wound and consider the plague each day and night until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated nor does the pus leave the joint, then you should know that here are only remedies for the pain in order to prevent the plague from spreading.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those remedies, some are separated and removed, those that are not separated and cause the member to swell and produce pain, pierce you to incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, you must clean each one of them as is appropriate for their cure, which is preceded by a description in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I must say and you present your case: when the flesh is torn, it protrudes over the member, as if the bone of the thigh and its support are broken and resemble those of the larger members, and do not attempt to attract or extract it, for such actions may cause death; after leaving that open for a few days, perhaps 2 or 3, then treat the wound if you have observed it, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	**Chapter XX.**
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of nodules that occur at the site of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motas seen during this process occur in the aftermath of a fracture, particularly near joints, and are characterized by the shape of the member; thus, they greatly hinder the member's normal function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the nodule is recent and administer those medicines that have been found effective for such cases, namely, aloes, senna, and similar herbs; if you take some or all of these, and they prove to be astringent, or contain albumen from urine, or are sour in nature, then apply them topically to the nodule in a compress, and constrict those around it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And check for any restriction that does not release it every few days; then loosen that and apply another, as long as the nodule persists; or fasten a lead sheet over the area, since lead has the property of drawing out any swelling in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is already decided that the stone has become hardened and narrowed due to necessity, then divide it by the most superior part of the stone, cut off the superfluous and prominent parts, or quickly extract it until it is completely removed; and treat it as it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	**Capitol XX1.**
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of a broken bone, once restored, then the delicate member should be bandaged properly according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, then the delicate member should be secured properly, not by any arbitrary means: one of which is for the solution of the ligament and the binding of the affected part according to what is needed; or due to an excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents proper nutrition from reaching the member; or because of excessive swelling; or due to inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or because of a pus pocket in the patient's body and through the weakness of the member.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to restrict food to the patient and make their body take in the swelling until the pus is multiplied; and administer baths; and carefully press and massage it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply pressure over the member, so that the pressure draws appropriate nutrients to it, or continue washing with warm water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones that are distorted, their operation should be prohibited from what it covers.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an incident occurs in the already restored member, then the healing of it from distortion and bending of the broken bone should be sought, and this is done by reshaping the member, however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation; nevertheless, one must heed the advice of those who consider that member to be newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers on our land who have performed this operation, and such an act is most reproachable, causing great fear at the sign of which it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the claudication and bending are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water containing herbs that soften them, such as alder bark and other similar ones; and a compress should be applied with this, or made from thick mucilage of alder bark, or mixed with hen's egg or olive oil, and applied to it; or the use of fig leaves, wrapped in cloth, like those used in certain medications called 'amermans' (soothing agents) for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by constant gentle friction against the moistest parts, and movement of the affected member should be given at regular intervals throughout the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already progressed and becomes severe, requiring surgical intervention, then it is necessary to drain the pus that has formed and ensure the continuity of the bone structure is maintained. This involves incising what is superfluous in terms of pressure from that part of the bone using subtle saws, and providing relief from strain and stress in that area through careful management.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De sermo en dislocacio.	**On the topic of dislocation**
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its normal position, resulting in a loss of mobility and distortion of the body's shape, causing severe pain and significant injury to the affected area.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter some dislocation, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the location becomes inflamed and the reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And also, do not think it is worse or stretched during the inflammation, because spasms and severe pain occur as a result.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, be aware that you must perform a flabotomy on the patient, and place something between their thighs to prevent further dislocation, and then immerse the affected member in warm water and oil, and reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the aforementioned water and oil, so that their memory returns to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as mentioned above, in the case of fracture; from the departure of the upper body to the lower part of the body.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both jaws are dislocated, without any fracture; then the dislocation of both is caused by one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places with a little pressure, and they become soft for a moment; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so much so that saliva from the injury cannot flow out, and neither can he close his mouth nor hold his tongue.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its original position on its own with a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to gently reduce the jaw to its place, without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the physician must have his hand on the patient's head, and the doctor inserts one finger of his hand into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is from two sides, and all the other fingers are outside them, which he equalizes; and he commands the patient to cease moving his jaws and release those that come from each separation; and the physician does the same with the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil until a light reduction of both is achieved without delaying the reduction of either. As we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relaxed, then place those powders from a bandage on cerot, and make it with wax and softened oil; and then gently lift them to facilitate the ligaments.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient should sleep on their back with their head between two pillows, so that they do not wince to the right or left, and do not force any cause for pain; having their food well chewed, then when the pains are relieved and the jaws are loosened, they will wince where they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And to this, facilitate rest should be given, and do not work on the perception of the mouth during eating, drinking, and excretion, as long as the jaw is loosened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places, then fevers and persistent vomiting occur, and a strong feeling of pain is felt in the patient's belly, and often they vomit pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss, and often those to whom this happens die within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated furcula (a bone in the elbow) and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the latissimus dorsi (a muscle in the back) by following its continuation towards the leg; however, sometimes it moves to a position outside its normal location, and this is described as dislocation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration is that the patient remains on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then compress the area with your palm firmly, so it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then apply pressure to that compress and poultice, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Place the end of the affected limb next to the joint, so it is not dislocated on any day; then cover and secure it as we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then apply bandages, poultices, and compression, and command the patient to remain in tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this medical procedure, the cure involves reducing the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On reducing the displacement of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in any ordinary sense, but it can be according to three manners: one of which is its displacement at the attachment from below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the first is that it is dislocated at the origin of the muscle, and this is done with difficulty; it is not dislocated in the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often dislocated and comes out in the back parts, especially after injury, more frequently in those where there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there is much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people experience some accident due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of it becomes inflamed from the inflammation, and it is cut by what has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then consider that you have understood this as far as you are able to be sure of it, and now proceed to the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips; so you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, since you find a clear difference between them; and you find at the top of the muscle a hollow and place the tendon after touching the top of the muscle as if it were a ball, and the patient cannot move their hand to its proper location, nor can they completely immobilize that joint.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If a bone is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you find obvious bruising, it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, light reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that the therapist raises the patient's hand to its original position; then they place finger pressure on the tendon below the dislocation, and gently push the joint back to its proper location, raising it with strength, and the therapist raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then they let go so it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	It is not possible to provide a translation without knowing the exact context and nuances of the medieval language used in the text. However, based on the given segments, here is a best-guess translation:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then place the patient back on their stomach, with the affected part elevated, waiting for it to be engulfed by swelling and tightness, and the doctor places his hand over the area, pulling the patient's limb away from the joints so that it is not damaged by movement, while another assistant holds the patient's head to prevent it from moving, for at that point it will return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: make sure to have a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, then insert your muscle between the affected area and the skin and elevate the skin until the disease is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's limb away from the joints below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the disease is lighter, then make sure to understand what else may be causing it to hang suspended, for this will worsen the condition, as the dislocation will soon return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: take a long stick with a rounded end, like a mortise chisel, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it under the patient; then drapes of lion's fur are placed over the head of the stick, and the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and your hand is extended towards the parts on one side, and the other part is stretched away with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance between two arms, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is removed from the center of the stick according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then cover the top with lion's fur to prevent the stick from disturbing the hernia.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place yourself in the space between the thighs of the patient, and stretch your hand or arm over the chest within reach, lay the chest on the support and the arm on the side and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Now place your arm across a scale according to the extent of the pain, and stretch your hand towards the space between the thighs, while the other hand is suspended on the other side, so that the joint can be reached soon enough.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And once the instrument has been inserted according to each possible method, and you have removed the thread that is as thick as it needs to be, apply a paste made from powdered earth mixed with egg album over all the muscles, ensuring it is thoroughly rolled on them, then tighten the thread gently; place the bandage over the paste, attach your hand to the patient's chest, and leave it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient's food intake is limited, as long as the member is supported, since it is easier to heal it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then the diet should be gradually increased and exercise practiced; therefore, if it is stopped and not softened, then healing has occurred.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that occurs to it or for other causes, then it should be administered a pointed cautery from three sides, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and compression are removed from time to time, and it is not strengthened and cannot raise that arm due to its nerves, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, then know that the joint will never stay in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is suffered, you must treat the foot and ankle or the posterior bones, reduction is done with pressure and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And both the other tightness should be treated, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes critical in the member and delays the movement of it, then the disease uses frequent baths to remove that gravity until it is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, most notably towards the front compared to the back, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip joint, this becomes manifest to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And take care to cover them, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes near the apoplexy caut, for if it comes to the apoplexy caut, reduction is difficult, and its healing is incomplete; especially when it's in the back parts, because it's the most harmful of all other types of dislocation, causing great pain, and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And for the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, the doctor's hand should be extended to two more points, and his arm expanded, with the hands of the assistants on the patient's thigh and buttocks, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the edge of his palm until it returns to its proper place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return the hand by bending it with the doctor's other hand, striking the thigh with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And indeed, two ministers should stretch their arms, and they must hold this object with two ministers to prevent it from slipping during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then rotate the arms through all directions, as it is wrapped with a long, folded cloth over their hand, or lint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, they apply some oil to it in order to prevent those causes that lead to stiffness of the joint, and then gently push and massage the joint until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is pressed upon that paste where it becomes stiff and is freed from tightness, lower the arm from the collarbone, and leave it for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it is loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave that one.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strained, continue with the application of the plaster and liniment, leaving it for some days until it falls off; then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If due to the gravity of the situation, reducing the joint is not possible, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in a bath and subtle friction, and rest, until it is alleviated; or place a heating pad over the affected joint during the day and night, if it is a case of greasy motion.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then hold that position, and immerse that part in a bath; when the swelling subsides, rub the joint with warm friction, repeating this process three times daily, until it is no longer painful.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	using the bath, until it is relieved.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scraped cow-flesh gap, pressing and straining on it; do this several times, as that part is moist and return it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is in the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the shoulder may be dislocated, and its reduction upon displacement is delicate; in contrast to other joints, it is nevertheless crucial to act swiftly in reducing it as soon as possible after dislocation, lest the location become inflamed or develop an abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table, extending their arm, and the doctor applying his or her hand or palm over the joint, then gently pressing to return it to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm of the hand has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the illness will cause the back of the hand to rest on a table facing the extent and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred prior to this, the position of the hand from within should be over the table so that the doctor's hand can act upon the impending joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if this can be done soon, it is good; otherwise, tighten the bandages gently, give them time to take effect, and do not interfere with their action, for if you do, there will be no improvement or you will not be able to reduce the hernia as it passes through its days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, consider the joint as it naturally bends according to its stiffness; do not force the illness in any way, but rather soften the hand and do not apply any cause; for you will know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and no cause is taken hold of them except by gently applying a cautery near their location, which strengthens them and gives them some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the disease returns, place your hand on the poultice that we have prepared and leave it there for several days; then loosen it and place it again, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movement is stopped and some discomfort occurs, apply gentle heat and friction a few times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter 29.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the treatment of dislocations:**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the joints are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated, either on the back of the hand or on the palm, tighten the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to this narrative, continue to straighten it and do not cease to loosen it during the day and practice movements, and do this for several days until it is tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's abdomen, attach it to that part and make it the first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .XXX. (Note: The number XXX seems to indicate the chapter number, rather than containing specific content.)
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine's vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation occurs in any of the spine's or collarbone vertebrae, it causes great pain, as they are pushed from their proper places, and in such cases, there is no cure, for death often follows the injury.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the indication of this is that the treatment of the injury is beyond their control, and they cannot hold it; sometimes, certain members or both legs or both arms or one of these are weakened, or a vertebra is dislocated, for in many cases, and frequently, these are broken and removed from four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So, the dislocation is already broken into parts, and it is then called a fracture.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure for this is that one must consider if the fracture occurred due to childhood, for in such cases, there is neither a cure nor a complete recovery.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those cases that arise from chance or impact or similar to these, the ancients have already described methods of treatment in lengthy discourse, from which the greatest benefit returns; you have perhaps been familiarized and condensed from this one, from which I will now expand and shape it from diverse instruments with which I will demonstrate and spread this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in the inflammation that occurs on the outer side of the foot, there is neither healing nor cure for it; similarly, in cases that are caused at two joints.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs on the back itself is cured with what you have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	For it is that the disease has spread over its face so that there is no equal pain near the wall, and it has extended itself below with great distress so that the foot of the patient is not affected.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then take a straight stick, place it under them in the middle of the thigh, and another stick across their feet at the other end of the thigh.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, but not embed it in the ground; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then cover the patient's head and leave the cords loosely bound; extend one cord to the stick that is placed under their head, and tie it to them; then tighten the other cord around their hips where they rest on their legs, and attach those to the other stick which is under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister should carefully extend the cord to the end of the stick, ensuring that neither the sticks nor the cords in their placed locations are damaged, but not yet firmly tied.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he rests on one table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is very near to where the disease lies.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, pushing firmly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open again the space which was closed with the hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground, holding the patient's head in the last joint of two fingers, whose length is a brah, and hold their head firmly in the last joint of two eyes, and the distance between each finger should be about a palm, and make incisions in each finger where the flow turns back, and hold each one firmly on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And then a thin stick is inserted into which the thorn is fixed, and it is twisted in both directions along the two axes of the sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the stick is formed, its length being about a palm, and it is twisted; and the other two sticks are similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the patient's foot in the groove where the head of it should be, and the ligaments that you have tightened on their thighs in the turn that should be on their legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then each turn should be held by a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor applies the sponge as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleaned, then apply a dry, albumen poultice, and stop; then place it over the poultice on a table whose breadth is about three digits or so, and its length is such that it covers the area of inflammation, and above the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then it is necessary to see the patient as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for healing, within moderation.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and soothe should be administered through a long course, as we have recommended; and this is done by applying a thin layer of lead on that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, danger occurs at the end of the spines of the back, and it is caused by dislocation; this bone is one that should not be subjected to these medicines, as they will strongly cause death to you if used.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the muscle's joint should not be displaced, but only those affected by smaller removal and concavity; it does not happen to others.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is displaced in four ways: either inside, or outside, or front, or back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly displaced inside, and rarely in front or back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the hip's displacement inside is that, when you adjust the patient's leg to their body, the opposite side becomes longer and the pain is more acute than on the healthy side; the patient cannot bend their foot towards the affected limb, and this is where the 'long bone' is broken, as it were, by a specific cautery mark, so that the head of the fracture is already perceived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that which causes dislocation is when parts are pulled outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of that which causes dislocation in the front parts is when the leg expands fully but does not bend in pain, and if it perforates to go forward and cannot return to the front parts; then the urine of it is retained and the pain of it is localized, and you must move the leg on the floor.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of that which causes dislocation in the back parts is that it does not expand the leg, nor can it bend the front part where it bends, and the leg becomes shorter than the other, the joint becomes soft, and the head of the matter is turned to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been corrected by itself or properly treated according to its position, then it is not in that cure entirely; and therefore it is not appropriate to make any further provision for it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Place in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you cut to it when you reduce the joint and extend it towards the inner and outer parts, and twist it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not need other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the injured part, or apply more pressure, or a ligature that is tight over the leg; another minister should stretch his hand over the affected area so that he places his fingers between the bones of the leg; and another should tighten the ligature at the base of the thigh, and have yet another minister hold the end of the ligature.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the leg or the inner part to angle it at the part of the fork, or from behind to the part of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And at the same time, while the patient is elevated on their bed and hanging slightly, the extent of all those parts becomes clear.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this specific extension is unique to all four sides.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding their treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is internal, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the base of the hernia in the area between the top of the hernia and the point where it becomes painful; and finally, extend the ligament above the painful part to the highest point of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then apply another strong force by grasping the patient's legs, pressing heavily on the painful part of the hernia, and extending it outward vigorously until it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this specific type of treatment is a lighter cure which reduces this member to a state better than the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from you and you do not obey the treatment according to this specific cure of all, then you should know that both feet of the patient must be bound together lightly, less tightly, on both the shins and both the ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of them according to their quantity is four times, and the patient's leg extended is more than the other by a quantity of two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia is suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the middle; and the length of it from the ground is a quantity of two arms' length.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young man to cut off the head of the hernia, and suspend it from another young man, and the other young man must shrink the hernia with firm pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	During the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation to the external part, ensure that the patient keeps still according to what we have recommended in the immobilization; and tighten the ligament properly on the affected thigh and on the patient's chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then use two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and another on their head; and place the sticks properly in the middle of the patient's infected leg, covered with moist drapes, so that the injury is not damaged by the stick placed between their thighs, so you can avoid any extension to other parts.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand continues the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey reversely, it will be very harmful; but if not, persist diligently and as we have said regarding the swelling through this engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Make sure that the patient lies on their back without movement.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you must ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then with his other hand, he gently pulls, maintaining this position until the joint is properly aligned.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is in the rear parts, you must not ensure that the patient is extended at the joints, but rather elevated above the ground; once you have verified that he is resting on a hard surface, just as we mentioned regarding the placement of the body on two joints, and his face and limbs are slightly extended, as we previously stated, there is no further need for adjustment.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, after the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, and it is that you stretch out two legs from the patient's condition, and when you see those folds and the patient extrudes their leg and you expand that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has been returned — and now you adjust the two parts, place paste and bind again so that the opening is not larger in any of the areas; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligament and paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those folds on the surface, then you will know that the dislocation is already closed, and therefore release the patient from rest.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and paste that area, remove it according to your initial stretch, and release it in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then, he should be disengaged from that, and make him walk slowly for some days, until he is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section labeled "Capitol .xxxii." Without additional context, it is challenging to determine the exact content or meaning. However, based on the pattern, it seems to be part of a medical text or treatise, potentially referring to a particular chapter discussing a medical procedure or condition.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outward, inward, or to the side, and not at all in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated shoulder is that the patient applies their leg to the affected area; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient stop right there, so that he extends his leg if possible; attach his back to the bed, and hold his foot between your hands; then make him press his shoulder against your palms, and catch it between your fingers on both sides over the dislocation, until it returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to hold the leg to the thigh, and then wrap those parts with bandages for three or four days, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, unless it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer strong poultices to the areas mentioned in the preceding cure description.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot, at times, is deformed by small removals, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for the dislocation is to reduce it gently, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and then wrapped until it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the cure when it is completely dislocated, you must stop the malady directly, and have someone hold a strong and brave position behind the back at the middle part of the foot.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then with your right hand, you should hold the foot from the topmost dominant part, and with your left hand, hold it from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then position the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand grasp it for two times, then extend your left hand; push the foot's toe towards the right against the leg support as you work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot's toe against the leg support on the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if you return in one time or two according to this manner, and if you turn the foot upside down, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again, for that is how it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this manner that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch out a hard piece of wood on the ground, and place the hernia between its parts, and you have already wrapped cloth around it so that the hernia does not come out.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then place the minister of the patient in position, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or bandage that lies on the collar of the foot; and another minister extend this or that minister against the extension of his part, and the padding between the thighs of the patient retain it, so that the condition of him is not pulled away from what remains after its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor will reposition the dislocation with their hands, and another minister hold the healthy thigh at the opposite side, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you declare the reduction of it as healthy, then apply a plaster and reinforce that with strong bandages, and bind the foot with bandage to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the bandage over those is not too tight and does not harm them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then place a poultice on it for two or three days; if the swelling subsides, remove the poultice.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or the fourth, remove the poultice, and forbid the patient from strenuous activity for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to move the patient despite the risk of further displacement, there is little certainty that the dislocation will not become worse, and this can lead to permanent damage; therefore, such a course of action should be avoided.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the gangrenous infection progresses, then cover it with poultices in the manner we described earlier, instead of applying remedies and moistening treatments, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: The number is written in Roman numerals, indicating the next chapter.)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of foot joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When a joint is dislocated, it should be reduced with gentle pressure; for what is not difficult should be done quickly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, you should then make the patient lie down with their affected leg elevated either on a pillow or table, and keep it in that position as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should stand over the patient, place your foot on what causes the pain in the joints, apply pressure to it until the dislocation returns, and observe that it is reduced and does not reappear in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then you should place a board under the patient's foot that takes the entire weight, with two ends, and firmly stretch it to its proper position for three days; then remove it, allowing the patient to rest from walking for several days, until healing is complete and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that are caused by disease or fracture or any other injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur and you delve into the cure for it and the restoration of the patient, you often see successive episodes of death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, he does not presume to write extensively about the cure of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, late, not hasty or presumptuous; and uses medicinal beginnings that give cautious step-by-step progress, leaving the judgment of the illness to divine providence, except for him from whom you hope salvation from destruction, relief from ill health, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore he strives as much as possible to bring about the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before engaging in cautious step-by-step processes.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the member returns to its proper place, administer treatment with a mild poultice and care for the wound using appropriate dried herbs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are separated, then you should drill through their joints, as we have mentioned regarding simple injuries in the preceding places of these.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear, as my instruction has preceded; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, and may it make your glory more permanent, and bring salutary care to your true body at the proper time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, these words of Albucasim are perfectly completed, from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
